My father was Albert William Kratzke, who went by the name "Bill."  Born in 1923, he found himself in an historical period
engulfed by both the Great Depression and World War Two. As my dad might have remarked in
his wry manner, “It was the worst of times, it was the worst of times.” The war is what concerns
us here. From 1943 to 1946, my dad served in the US Army and from '44 to '46, he was with
the 14th Armored Division.  In 1998 Dad penned his memoirs of his life in the army, which he gave
the punning title "GI Bill." It’s my privilege now to read that text to you.

Dad provided many footnotes that I have tried to smoothly work into the narrative.
There is a lot of information in these footnotes and I found them too interesting to omit.  Many, if not most
of these notes refer to visits later in his life and I enjoyed imagining him revisiting places and people.
I will make it clear when I've switched to and from a footnote.

Likewise, I will indicate when Dad shifts from first-person narration to third-person exposition.
and when he switches back.  He provided these expositions to introduce the "big picture" and then
he switches back to the view that he, as a member of a tank crew, had.

In the original text, there are several appendices and maps that, for
obvious reasons, cannot be read into an audio file. When one medium gets transferred to another, some
material inevitably is lost.  In this case, we are going from print to audio, and
diagrams, maps, and pictures are left behind.

So, away we go with one man’s experience in the cataclysm that was WW-2. I hope you enjoy it
or, at the least, gain some insight into why the journalist Tom Brokaw described Americans of
Dad’s time “The Greatest Generation.”

GI Bill:

The Autobiographical Sketch of a Civilian in Uniform During
World War II

by Albert William Kratzke

To Ruth

Who cajoled and coaxed, but also supported and encouraged me.
I could not -- or would not -- have undertaken this project
without her help, especially in editing the manuscript.
Thank you, my dear!!

FOREWORD

To my children Bill, Mary, Tom, Steve, and Peter,
Your mother has already written a comprehensive history of our
family starting with her nineteenth birthday on August 14, 1945,
the day World War II ended.

Historians deem that war the defining event of the
twentieth century. Our family's story, therefore, would be less
than complete without some accounting of it, so I relate to you
my remembrance of the years between the United States' entry into
the War in 1941 and my return to civilian life in 1946.  I have
interspersed my personal account with the impersonal big picture
of the War in Europe, so you may see how my part as an individual
soldier played itself out against the much larger backdrop of
strategies, battles, and final victory.

I am writing shortly after the fiftieth anniversary of many of the
important and decisive events of the War. The anniversary was duly
noted with many solemn observations at battle sites and with much
attention from the news media.  Your mother and I were among the
many pilgrims who paid homage both in Europe and in the South Pacific .

My childhood and early teens were like those of many other children
of the Twenties and Thirties. I was secure in the bosom of my
parents, my brothers, my extended family, and my church. I felt the
Depression only as a time for careful stewardship of resources and
conservative approach to spending, not a time of want or privation.

I spent two grade-school years, fourth grade and eighth grade,
attending St. Luke's Lutheran School in St. Louis. There I stayed
with my mother's sisters, my Aunts Minnie, Frieda, and
Ella Hoefener. My mother's other living sister and her husband, my
Aunt Emma and Uncle Frank Holbrook, lived nearby.
Uncle Frank had a maiden sister Ada, who rented a house near
Sportsman's Park, home of the American League St. Louis Browns and
the National League St. Louis Cardinals. With all those relatives I
was surely loved and cared for -- and just as surely spoiled!

The events leading up to the War occurred during those formative
years, but I have only dim recollections of the current events
of the time. As a teenager I was less interested in the accounts of
international diplomacy and invasions in Europe than I was in the
daily baseball standing of my favored Cardinals.  I spent one more
academic year living with my aunts -- when I was a freshman at
Washington University in St. Louis in the fall of 1940. By then
I was more aware of world happenings, but even so as a college
freshman I did not spend much time poring over news articles
relating events on other continents.

The citizens of our country
were especially ill-informed about things that happened in Germany.
Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's assurance of Peace in Our Time
had quieted our fears. I did not learn of incidents like the
1938 Kristallnacht, that night when Jewish business establishments
were smashed, until after the War. The existence of concentration
camps was regarded as mere rumor.

Recent historians have written much about the United States'
ignoring what was going on in Germany during the late Thirties.
They are especially critical of
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and of the papacy. However,
other historians such as Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., maintain that
Roosevelt alone among the free world leaders recognized the danger
of Nazism but was powerless to act without the cooperation of
Congress. Roosevelt, in fact, was the first leader to recall his
country's ambassador to Berlin.

One incident worthy of note occurred towards the middle of my first
semester at Washington University. My German teacher was deported,
sent back to Germany.  There was much speculation about his
activities in this country. Was he a spy or perhaps a double agent
being sent to Germany by our government? We never found out, but I
suspect he was just a German citizen who had taken a job in the
United States. His sympathies were surely with Germany, but
I doubt that he was involved in any sinister 'cloak and dagger'
schemes.

My post-war years, of course were different. I had become aware of
events on the world scene. Moreover, I had been in combat, a
sobering experience. It has been said that one does not return from
a war the same person as the one who went into the war. One is
different -- perhaps inexplicably different -- but surely
different. I experienced that change, and you may want to know
something of the times and events that contributed to that change.
I hope that what follows helps you to understand.

Chapter I: PEARL HARBOR AND ME

Shew me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths
Lead me in thy truth, and teach me.  (Psalm 25:4-5a, KJV)

After my freshman year at Washington University, I matriculated as
a sophomore at the University of Minnesota for the academic year
1941-42.  There I quickly settled into a student's usual routine of
classes, work, and play.  My father continued to serve his parish
in Height of Land, Minnesota, so I was closer to home than when I
went to school in St. Louis. Everything seemed to be going very
well when --

The Japanese Navy bombed Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941.
On that date America's formal involvement in World War II began.
The United States officially declared war on Japan on December 8
and on Japan's Axis partners, Germany and Italy, on December 11.

December 7, 1941, fell on a Sunday. I went to church that morning
at the University of Minnesota Continuation Center. Gamma Delta,
the Lutheran student organization, used the chapel in that facility
to hold its services. On the walk back to my room I noticed that
the street was very quiet. When I reached home, Joe Janecky, my
roommate, was uncharacteristically somber.  I then learned why
there was no one on the streets.

The news of the bombing of Pearl Harbor, which happened late
morning central standard time, was on every radio station, and
everybody was at home listening. Joe and I were excited and scared,
and we talked of what the War might mean for each of us.  Joe was
in the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps, so he was certain he
would be called to duty. He hoped he would be able to stay in
school long enough to earn a commission. I had no such commitment,
so I could not even speculate as to what might happen to me.

I was working for my meals as a bus boy and dishwasher in the
University hospital dining room for student nurses and other
employees. It kept strict hours, so I had to hurry off to lunch.
I left Joe and walked the half-mile to the hospital. For the first
time after hearing the grim news I was alone.

I wondered if and when I might be called to serve. I thought about
my parents and how they would react to my being so close to the age
of induction -- and I prayed. I do not remember how I prayed or for
what, but I know I prayed, and I prayed hard.

The next day I attended the all-University convocation. A radio
broadcast of President Roosevelt's Declaration of War speech
("On December 7, a date that will live in infamy ... ") was part
of the program. I was even more introspective than I had been the
day before, for now I began to appreciate the gravity of our
nation's position and what it might mean to me.

Our country's entry into the War silenced all who had expressed
ambivalent ideas concerning world politics, especially in regard to
Germany. There were many people of German extraction in the society
I knew. The majority of parishioners in the congregations my father
served as well as in the neighboring parishes were descendants of
German immigrants. In fact, the midwest states had a large German
population. Germany of the Thirties had achieved economic and
political stability, so naturally some people openly expressed
sympathy for the German cause and a grudging admiration for
Adolph Hitler. One such person, known affectionately as Papa B, was
a pastor in the same circuit as my home congregation. He was
outspokenly sympathetic towards the new Germany, so much so that
his fellow ministers cautioned him to keep his opinions to himself.
However, I do not think there was ever any doubt about his loyalty
to the United States, were he forced to make a choice.

During Christmas break that first December of the War, everyone was
quite subdued. I went back to the campus a little early to try to
determine what to do. I was a pre-medical student at the time, so
there was some hope that I might be deferred from the draft
(Student deferments usually went to persons in medical,
dental, and divinity schools).  By then, however, I realized I was
not suited for a career in medicine. I went into pre-med for the
usual reasons, to do good and to earn well, and I was also
subjected to some gentle parental pressure. But I soon found that I
had no great aptitude for the natural sciences and that the
physical sciences and mathematics were much more interesting and
certainly easier for me.

Five of my friends and acquaintances of the period are of special
note. One of them was my roommate Joe. Three -- Neil Stacey,
Floyd Myrick, and Joe Vranish -- were fellow employees in the
nurses' dining room, and Tom Olson, the fifth member of the group,
was an orderly at the University hospital. I shall write something
about each of them, for each had different plans and expectations
concerning the War.

Joe Janecky was from Barnesville, Minnesota. His father was a
dentist. Prior to corning to the University of Minnesota, Joe lived
with an uncle in New York.  He was in residence there long enough
to satisfy the requirements for entrance to the City College of
New York (CCNY) (Later, when the college was recognized as a
university, its letters changed to CUNY). The school had (and
has) a no-tuition policy for residents of New York City. While
living in New York, Joe worked as a theater and concert hall usher.
The job required him to own his own tuxedo. Because he already had
a tux when he came to Minnesota, he became an usher for the
Minneapolis Symphony, where ushers also were expected to provide
their own dress clothes. The concerts were held in Northrup
Auditorium on the University campus. If there were a vacant seat in
the back rows, Joe often let me have it shortly after the concert
began. That was a nice arrangement, and I got to hear the orchestra
under several famous conductors. The resident conductor at the time
was Dimitri Mitropoulos.

Neil Stacey was from Red Lodge, Floyd Myrick from Hamilton, and
Joe Vranish from Roundup -- all towns in Montana. They had been
fraternity brothers at Montana State University in Bozeman, and
they all aspired to medical school. Montana had no state medical
school, so they took advantage of the University of Minnesota
medical school's policy of extending resident privileges to the
citizens of Montana. Neil, Floyd, and Joe jointly owned a 1930 Model A Ford
and traveled to Minneapolis in it during the summer of 1941. The
Model A had the nickname Bessie, which on occasion became
BessiFord. I soon bought a share in the old car. Even though I had
only part-ownership, I consider Bessie as my first automobile. I
had never studied auto mechanics, but I soon learned all about a
Model A Ford. I became the one who could keep Bessie going.

Neil was accepted into dental school in Chicago sometime in 1943.
Dental school was a compromise; he really wanted medical school.
Nonetheless, preparing to be a dentist kept him out of the Service.
He married Gwen Sayers, a nurse whom he had met while working at
the University student nurses' dining room. He and Gwen moved to
Missoula, Montana, after the War, and they lived very nicely.
(Footnote 1: Our family was graciously entertained at breakfast in
the Stacey home on our way to Boulder, Colorado, in the summer of
1960. Neil died of a heart attack some time after our visit.
He was only in his forties.

Floyd, too, went to dental school as a way to avoid the draft.
Because he was in a Navy program and officially in the Navy, he was
required to go into active service after being graduated. Upon
completion of his obligation, he still wanted to become a
physician. He applied to medical school, was accepted, completed
the requirements, and later specialized in orthopedic surgery. He
married Delores McKinney, a nurse from the University of Minnesota.
Floyd's residencies were in Ocean Lake, Oregon, and in Seattle. He
also worked as a Boeing physician for a time. We saw the Myricks
quite a bit during our early days in Seattle.

I even arranged a rental house for them. In 1952, I was working for
T. Wilson, who later became president and chief executive officer
of Boeing. T. was slated to study at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology on a Sloan-Kettering fellowship for a year. That was
exactly the length of time the Myricks needed housing, so I got
the two parties together. After many years of marriage, Floyd
and Dee were divorced, but they still maintain some kind of
relationship.

Joe Vranish went into the Navy and served in the Pacific Theater.
He used his GI Bill benefits for an education in business
administration. He married Rita, a nurse from his home town, and
took a position with a midwestern utility company.
(Footnote 2: We visited the Vranishes in their home in Minot,
North Dakota, in 1964. The nine children, our five and their four,
got up a front yard ballgame. All the offspring slept on the
Vranish rec room floor. We seemed to be a compatible group, and I
have regrets that we did not make more occasions to be together.

Tom Olson was studying to be an architect while working in the
hospital. I lost all contact with Tom until after the War. One day
early in my employment at Boeing, I ran into him; he was working
for Boeing, too. He married after the War and moved to Moscow,
Idaho, to attend the University of Idaho law school.  From there he
went to work for Boeing, and later still he tried hospital
administration at Swedish Hospital in Seattle. We met with the
Olsons socially several times during their Seattle stay. Tom was
still in hospital administration when he and his family moved to
Lima, Ohio. After their move we lost contact except at
Christmastime. One year our card was returned, and I have been
unable to contact Tom since then.

The events of the War now became very important to us students.
Before the War few young people paid attention to headlines, but
after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, all of us followed the
War news daily.  The first event of great interest was the landing
of American troops in Northern Ireland in January, 1942. That meant
that we had a physical presence in Europe, and surely many more
troops would soon be sent overseas.

In February, the country went on daylight-saving time to conserve
energy. It meant that from April to October we were on double
daylight-saving time: our clocks were set two hours ahead. Before
the War, daylight-saving time was a local option, and no Minnesota
community had ever voted to have it.
(Footnote 3: After the war, DST was still determined by local
option.  In 1948, our first year in Corvallis, the Zion mission
festival had an afternoon speaker from another county. His county
was not on the same time as ours, so he arrived about an hour late
for the service.

In early April, 1942, Bataan and Corregidor in the Philippines fell
to the Japanese. On orders from President Roosevelt, General
Douglas MacArthur and his family escaped to Australia in a small
boat. Before he left, he made his famous pledge to the Filipino
people, "I shall return!"

After the fall of Corregidor, the Japanese forced the captured
soldiers and civilians to march to a prison camp. General Jonathan
Wainwright was the hero of the hour.  In spite of his rank, the
Japanese forced him to accompany the captured Americans on the
infamous Bataan Death March.
(Footnote 4: The Rev. and Mrs. Carroll Hinderlie were missionaries in the Philippines on December 7,
l941. Consequently they were part of the Bataan Death March. They spoke of their
experience at Holden Village when we visited there in 1968. It has been reported by other
observers that they were a great source of inspiration and encouragement in a most trying
situation.

Shortly after the defeat in the Philippines,
General James Doolittle's daring raid on Japan was the big news.
The general's squadron of two-engine B-25 bombers was launched
from the carrier Hornet cruising six hundred miles off the
Japanese coast. After the mission was complete, the bombers went on
and landed in China. It was thought to be almost impossible to
launch an airplane as large as a B-25 from a carrier deck. I saw
newsreels of planes taking off and wonder still how the pilots
managed. After a bomber left the edge of the carrier deck, it would
drop almost to the tops of the waves before beginning its climb.
The raid had no great strategic value and the bombers actually did
little damage, but it was a great morale boost for the homefront.
The raid lifted spirits after the devastating defeat at Bataan in
the Philippines.
(Footnote 5: Television was not yet common, so the public's chance
to see films of current events was limited to newsreels, one of
which was part of every movie program. The big newsreel makers were
Pathe News, Movietone News, and The March of Time.

In late May, 1942, Reinhard Heydrich, deputy chief of the Nazi
Gestapo and chief German functionary in Czechoslovakia, was
assassinated by Czech partisans. The immediate reprisals were
terrible. Among the atrocities committed were the murder of all the
males in the village of Lidice and the razing of the town. Lidice
was wiped from the face of the earth. Even though my roommate Joe
was a second or third generation American, he had Czechoslovakian
roots. He may have had no relatives in Lidice, but he was extremely
shaken and horrified nonetheless. After nme months of sharing a
room, I had gotten close to Joe, so I, too, experienced a vicarious
horror.
(Footnote 6: In November, 1995, we visited the Holocaust Museum in Washington, DC There we learned
that the atrocity committed at Lidice was only the beginning of the reprisal for the
assassination of Heydrich. In related incidents a total of 6,000 Jews and Czechs were killed.

The most sensational War news late that spring was the report of
the Battle of Midway, by some accounts the turning point of the
naval war in the Pacific.  Once more the country's morale was
boosted. The Battle of Midway was a decisive victory for the
Allies.

In North Africa, General Irwin Rommel -- 'The Desert Fox,'
acknowledged genius in the art of armored warfare, and a German
World War I hero -- was having an easy time with the English in
Egypt.

A little-known general named Dwight David Eisenhower assumed
command of the Allied Forces in Europe. I was to get to know much
more of him later.

At the end of the school year, Joe and I moved across campus to a
spacious rooming house on East River Road. We had a much bigger and
brighter room than previously. At the first rooming house each of
us paid ten dollars a month rent, and at the second house we paid
twelve dollars a month. That's a 20% increase, but we thought the
new room worth the difference. The house was across the street from
a bluff overlooking the Mississippi River. Our room faced the
river, so we had a nice view and felt the river breezes. We could
occupy our room only for the summer, so in September Joe and I
moved into a rooming house across the street, where I stayed until
I went into the Army.

That summer Joe and I both went to work for
E.I. duPont deNemours and Co. at Rosemount, a town south of
St. Paul. duPont was building a gunpowder factory, so the company
needed construction workers. Each of us was hired as a
rodman/chainman, the lowest rung on the ladder of a survey crew.
Joe, however, volunteered when we were asked if there were any
typists among the new hires. Joe could not type, but he thought
office work would be easier than working outdoors. The day that we
hired in was cold and rainy, so the weather probably had something
to do with his choice. He made out fine, typing by the 'hunt and
peck' method. The irony of all this is that I could type, but I did
not volunteer because I thought I probably could not type well
enough.

We rode to work with Al Fischer, a parishioner from St. John's in
Villard.  Work at duPont was interesting and paid well. I
eventually rose above my humble beginnings and was permitted to
operate surveying instruments called transit and level. I felt as
if I were contributing to the war effort.
(Footnote 7: We have other connections with the town of Rosemount.
Carl Friedrich, Ruth's mother's brother, served a parish there.
John Volkert, Ruth's father's father's brother, and his family
established a farming community nearby. When the defense plant was
built, they had to sell their land and move. At a Volkert reunion
in 1989, Ruth and her sisters made renewed
contact with that branch of the Volkert family.

The Marines landed on Guadalcanal August 7, 1942. Many tales of
heroism came out of the battles waged there.

The Germans advanced east into Russia, and the city of Stalingrad
was in the news a great deal.

War events made good material for films. Just as the movies of the
Thirties offered escape to a country in the depths of the
Depression, the films of the early Forties gave us something to
cheer about. John Wayne played in Flying Tigers, the story of a
squadron of P-40 fighter planes. General Claire Chennault led the
real Flying Tigers in China and was a popular hero.  Humphrey
Bogart played in Sahara, which was about the tanks in North Africa.
Holiday Inn with Bing Crosby was another popular movie. Its remake,
also starring Bing Crosby, was called White Christmas.

The summer ended, and we went back to school. Joe was still in the
NROTC and awaited assignment while taking classes. I was not
subject to the draft until later because I was still under age.

In early October, I traveled to Brainard, Minnesota, to be the best
man in the Warren Maertens-Ruth Hilpert wedding. Ruth had been a
good friend since 1927. Our fathers were ministers in neighboring
parishes, and the Hilperts and the Kratzkes saw each other socially
almost every week. Ruth and I were in the same class and went to
the same high school. Ruth probably would not have asked me to be
best man for Warren (I hardly knew him!) except that his friends
were all some distance from Minneapolis, where he was stationed. I
did not own a conservative suit, so I borrowed one from
Floyd Myrick. I rode the train to Brainard with Marie, Ruth's
sister and maid-of-honor. The wedding was held in early evening
because we had to be out of the church by 7:30 P.M., when members
of the congregation were to have hymn practice with the new, i.e.
1941, hymnal. I stayed with the Hilperts that night and went back
to Minneapolis the next day.

In October, 1992, Ruth and I
attended the Maertens' golden wedding anniversary celebration in
Worthington, Minnesota. Because I had been best man, I was asked to
be the master of ceremonies, and Ruth played the piano for the
assembly of family and friends. In the spring of 1990, we also
attended Ruth Hilpert Maertens' and my fiftieth anniversary of high
school graduation in Frazee, Minnesota.

Also,
Edward T. Hilpert, Jr., (called 'Jonesy' for as long as I can
remember) lives in Seattle and has been our attorney since we moved
to the Northwest.

In October, the St. Louis Cardinals beat the New York Yankees four
games to one in the 1942 World Series. Like my father, who was
graduated from Concordia Seminary in St. Louis, I was a Cardinal
fan. Furthermore, my mother was from St. Louis, and, as mentioned
earlier, I had gone to school there variously myself.

Because I was in St. Louis for the eighth grade and
second year of confirmation class, I have the unusual distinction
of having zone through two public confirmation examinations, one at
St. Luke's in St. Louis and later another at St. John's in
Height of Land. St. Luke's confirmed its class on Palm Sunday, and
St. John's confirmed its class in June. After my two examinations,
I was confirmed by my father at St. John's.

Joe and I went duck hunting that fall. Joe's parents owned a lodge
on a lake near New Prague. My recollection of the lodge is bigger
than life. I remember it as a place not unlike a movie set, either
for a Sonja Henie skating movie or for a
Nelson Eddy/Jeanette MacDonald Canadian Rockies romance. It had a
huge stone fireplace and open-beamed ceilings. Joe's dad joined us
for part of our weekend stay.
By this time Joe's father had moved his dental
practice from Barnesville, Minnesota, where Joe grew up, to
New Prague. New Prague was also the home of Irmgard Meyer, who
married Otto Volkert, Ruth's uncle. Ruth was s flower girl at the
Meyer-Volkert wedding in 1931.

Joe lent me a 16-gauge double-barrel
shotgun. We settled into our duck blind, set out decoys, and
waited. Joe blatted away on a silly duck call. It must have
attracted the birds, for a large flock came over our heads and
surprised us. Joe shouted, "Shoot where they're the thickest!"
I blasted away with both barrels and got nothing. Neither did Joe.
We did get some ducks later in the day, but we had to leave them
with Joe's dad. We had no way to prepare them at school.

I had to register with the Selective Service when the draft age was
lowered to eighteen. Villard, the town to which my family moved
from Height of Land, was in Pope County. I had the choice of
registering in Minneapolis, my address while attending the
University, or in Glenwood, county seat of Pope County.  I figured
the draft board from home might be more sympathetic towards a local
boy going to college. I was mistaken: they classified me 1-A. I
thought they might allow me to finish a school term I had already
started if my induction date came during that quarter. Again I
erred: they set my induction date for May with no extension.

So I volunteered!

Gas rationing started in December. Most car owners were issued an A
sticker, which limited the holder to four gallons of gasoline per
week. Automobiles of that vintage seldom ran more than fifteen
miles to the gallon. People in preferred professions, such as
clergymen and physicians, were issued C stickers, which entitled
them to more gasoline. My father had a C sticker.  The ration
sticker also determined the number and quality (recap or new)
of tires the holder could purchase.

In mid-December, after the end of fall quarter, I went to work in
the Minneapolis Post Office for the Christmas rush. I put in long
hours, but I did not mind. The pay, a dollar an hour, was good, and
I made enough money to do my Christmas shopping. I think I went
home on December 23.  That Christmas was the second one of the
War, and the country seemed more optimistic than it had in 1941.
The War was going better for the Allies.

Sometime during the 1942-1943 school year, Joe J started dating
Cleo. After I came back from the War, Cleo was still on the scene.
Joe and Cleo eventually got married.
(Footnote 12: In the fall of 1994, I re-established contact with
Joe. Through an unlikely set of circumstances, I met someone who
knew the Janecky family. I was able to call Joe, and he and I had a
long chat. Ruth and I visited Joe in May, 1996. He was living on a
small goat farm in Texas. Cleo, mother of his two children, had
died, and Joe subsequently remarried. He had led a colorful and
interesting life during the fifty years since I had last seen him!

Like many other students about to go into the Service, my attention
was easily diverted from school work. Dick Keskey, a GI friend of mine,
told me that he almost flunked out of the University of Michigan
just before he went into the Army.  I made occasional stops at the
game room and the billiard room in the University student union.
The visits were infrequent during my early days on the University
of Minnesota campus, but as the time drew near for my induction, I
seemed to go oftener.

I particularly liked to play three-cushion billiards and bridge.
Harold Hill, the Music Man, would probably consider any skills I
have in either game as evidence of a misspent youth. You got
trouble trouble right here in River City!

In January, 1943, I first heard the name Casablanca.
Franklin Roosevelt, Charles de Gaulle, and Winston Churchill met
there for a conference. Even before the city's namesake movie was
made, the news media endowed Casablanca with an aura of mystery
and intrigue, a kind of sinister glamour.

Early in 1943, rationing of leather shoes, canned foods, sugar,
meats, fats, and cheese began. I ate at the University hospital,
so I did not need any ration stamps. I gave them all to my mother.
I was no longer given stamps after I went into the Army.

Sometime during the winter quarter a call went out for armory
guards. Joe Janecky, Joe Vranish, and I volunteered. We were given
free housing in a barracks-type room in the armory. We stood guard
at night about three times a week, one two-hour shift each time. As
guards we also had to check for security breaches such as unlocked
doors. The guard on duty made one round during his shift, which
took him about twenty minutes. I usually spent the rest of my time
studying or reading. That was my first exposure to military life.

Between winter and spring quarters I took the train to Villard. A
late winter storm stopped all traffic between Little Falls and
Villard. The Northern Pacific Railroad paid for the passengers'
hotel bills and meals. The accommodations and the meals were nice,
but I wanted very much to be at home since I was certain that I
would be leaving soon for the Service.

The War in Europe began on September 1, 1939, when Germany invaded
Poland. England honored her treaty with Poland and was drawn into
the conflict. Because of the War, general world tension, and the
United States' poor state of preparedness, President Roosevelt and
Congress agreed that we needed a draft of civilian personnel for
our standing Army. The draft began in October, 1940. Draftees were
to serve for one year. After the US entry into the War, however,
the time stipulation was changed to the duration of the War
plus six months.

Immediately after the draft was initiated, my father conducted a
lot of weddings.  Married status was a reason for draft exemption,
and getting married became a method for dodging conscription. Many
marriages were only marriages of convenience. Frequently friends of
a couple observed that they did not even know that the young people
were going together. Most of the marriages that I remember seem to
have worked out.

Things changed after Pearl Harbor. A uniform became a badge of
honor. To be sure, part of the urgency to go into Service arose
from the Everybody is doing it syndrome. When one is very young, he
sometimes does a thing more for adventure than for ideals. A
draft-eligible male appearing in civilian clothes frequently drew
speculation from observers as to the reason for his civilian
status.

The homefront also joined in the War fervor. Families were proud to
be associated with servicemen, although I am sure that no mother in
her heart of hearts wanted to send her son into the dangerous
arenas of armed conflict.  Parents of servicemen displayed small
banners with stars in their windows, a blue star for each
serviceman and a gold star for a serviceman who gave his life for
his country.

I, too, wanted to be a part of the great national War effort. On a
Monday in early May, 1943, I went into the Army as a private. I
spent a few days with my family before going in. I could have
reported to the induction center in Glenwood, but my parents and I
wanted as much time together as possible.  I asked for and was
granted permission to report directly to Fort Snelling, near
Minneapolis. Fort Snelling would have been my first stop anyway
had I gone into the Service from Glenwood.

The round trip from Villard to Minneapolis, a distance of about two
hundred forty miles, required fifteen to twenty gallons of precious
gasoline, but Mother and Dad still wanted to take me to
Minneapolis. We left early on a Monday morning. My brothers, Bob
and Paul, were in school. I did not have to go directly to Fort
Snelling. My mother packed a lunch, and we had a picnic at
Minnehaha Falls Park, not far from Fort Snelling. After lunch and a
short stroll, we could see no reason to stay on. Dad parked at the
gate, and he and Mother walked down the post entrance boulevard
with me as far as they were permitted to go.

I walked on alone into a world that both frightened and excited me.





Chapter II: Army Training

Be not far from me, for trouble is near (Psalm 71:3, KJV)

Once inside Fort Snelling, I was anxious, excited, and scared.  I
tried not to look back to the entrance gate where Mother and Dad
were still standing. Finally I did turn around for one last wave.
One does not think of bravery or the British 'stiff upper lip' at
such a time, but I believe that my parents had more of those
qualities than I. Perhaps they were of stronger faith.

Upon arrival, I was sworn into the United States Army. That night
I prayed the prayer of a frightened young man.

When a civilian was inducted into the Army in those days, he was
made to suffer certain indignities. He was kept on edge by means of
fear and intimidation. From the very beginning of his service he
played a 'cat and mouse' game.  'How to beat the system' became an
obsession. I, too, tried some of the tricks. My assignment to
quarters was not yet definite that first afternoon. I was simply
told to find a bunk in any one of a number of wooden floored tents.
I had no sooner done so when a non-commissioned officer poked his
head through the tent opening and announced that everyone in that
tent was on Kitchen Police the next morning and would report to the
kitchen at 4:00 A.M.

Since I had not even unpacked, I picked up my luggage and moved to
another tent. One fellow told me that he had moved four times.
Eventually, of course, the powers that be made definite bunk
assignments, and most of us were made to do some kind of onerous
duty.

My stay at Fort Snelling was one of examinations. My pre-induction
physical in part determined my draft status. Now I was given
another physical, and I was also given the Army General
Classification Test. The results of the AGCT determined one's fate
in the Army. It was like an intelligence test, so usually
a person's AGCT score and his Intelligence Quotient were similar.
Mine were. The importance of this AGCT was impressed upon us, but
some of the fellows seemed not to take the testing seriously. If
only they had known that much of what would happen to them was
determined by that one several-hour test.

For example, my acceptance into the Army Specialized Training
Program was determined by my AGCT score. The ASTP was a college
training program designed to prepare servicemen for certain
specialties.

After about four days at Fort Snelling, I was put into a group
going to Camp Barkley near Abilene, Texas. Camp Barkley was the
basic training center for medics. My 1-A draft classification
carried with it a limited service qualifier because I was
nearsighted. Service in the Medical Corps was regarded as
limited service (Tell that to any front-line stretcher bearer!).
Also I had been in a pre-med curriculum in college, so the Medical
Corps assignment seemed logical. Much of basic training was the
same for all branches of the Service, and I reasoned that I could
work the problem of transfer later. I did not want to be a combat
stretcher-bearer.

Is it not ironic than many of the soldiers with the
limited service classification (myself included) eventually found
themselves in some of the worst fighting of the War?!

We boarded the Rock Island Rocket, a very fast civilian train, in
St. Paul and were assigned to Pullman cars. Two men slept in each
lower berth and one man in each upper. I managed to get an upper.
The Army does not allow for much privacy, so I especially enjoyed
my upper berth. The trip was pleasant and uneventful.  The club car
had a speedometer above the bar. Going through parts of Oklahoma
our speed was over ninety miles per hour. Liquor was sold by local
option in Oklahoma, each county determining by vote whether to be
'wet' or 'dry.' The 'wet' and 'dry' counties must have alternated
because the bartender seemed always to be opening or closing the
bar.

In Dallas our cars were switched to a different rail line, and we
went on to Camp Barkley. At the camp railhead we were met by
commissioned officers and non-commissioned officers, all of them a
part of the permanent staff of the camp.  A sergeant was then put
in charge of each arriving group of recruits. As soon as my group
was assembled, the sergeant marched us off to the our barracks,
our home for the next three months. We were still dressed for a
Minnesota spring, so we found the march in the Texas heat very
uncomfortable.

Basic training began immediately. Many recruits complained
constantly, but things were not all that bad, really. Summer in
central Texas may have been hot, but it was not humid. Unless a
recruit drew KP or other fatigue assignment, his day was routine.
He arose at 6:00 A.M. and 'fell out' for morning roll call and
calisthenics. Before breakfast he policed the area around the
barracks, i.e. he picked up cigarette butts, bits of paper, etc.
One of the drill sergeants used very colorful prose. His favorite
directive was "All I want to see is asses and elbows!"

One of the jokes that circulated through the company
concerned a crusty drill sergeant, who divided his people into
groups according to their educational levels. The college men were
assigned the hardest and dirtiest work, the high school group the
next worst, etc. Those with a minimum education were told to stand
and watch the others so as to learn from them.

The recruit went to breakfast about 7:00 A.M..  Drill or a field
exercise followed at 8:00 A.M. An hour-long lunch break began at
high noon. Afternoons were generally devoted to classes -- a
merciful arrangement because summer afternoons in Texas are very
hot. Retreat formation was held at 5:00 P.M. with a retreat parade
scheduled for every Friday. Dinner was at 6:00 P.M., and after
dinner a soldier's time was his own. Lights out came at 11:00 PM.

Because there was inspection every Saturday morning, Friday evening
was spent getting haircuts, shining shoes, pressing trousers, etc.
There was only one company barber on the post, so he was very busy
on Friday evenings.  A poor showing at the Saturday inspection
meant extra duty or loss of time off. Such things as Sunday KP,
extra drill or extra calisthenics were common punishments. The
platoon leader, a lieutenant, usually conducted the inspection,
although sometimes the company commander did the job himself.  The
inspecting officer was accompanied by a drill sergeant. The officer
wore white gloves and ran his gloved fingers into out-of-the-way
places in an attempt to find dust. He might also toss a quarter
onto a randomly-chosen bed to see if it would bounce, a sign the
bed was made properly. One time he checked all the beds. (I quickly
learned to make a very tight bed with very taut square corners!).

The inspector paid special attention to personal grooming. Shoes
were to be shined to a high polish. A 'blitz' cloth was used to
polish brass belt buckles. Keeping a cotton uniform looking good in
hot weather was hard. Sometimes our drill sergeant conducted a
pre-inspection inspection. If someone had not shaved to the
sergeant's satisfaction, he was made to take a quick shave with
cold water. Bloody nicks and raw skin didn't help get the poor guy
through inspection either!

Failure at inspection was a minor infraction. For more serious
breaches of the rules such as failure to answer morning or evening
roll call (tantamount to being Absent Without Leave) or
insubordination, the training cadre convened and then meted out
more severe punishment such as standing at attention or parade rest
with full field pack for a long period of time in the Texas heat.
Such a punishment today would be considered cruel and unusual. I
never experienced anything like that.

We had several Gls who seemed to invite negative attention. In
particular there were some professionals from New York --
accountants, attorneys, stock brokers, and such -- who did not take
to training in west central Texas very well.  A walk in Central
Park was their version of 'roughing it.' They had a Regular Army
drill sergeant, a country boy from the South, training them, and
they seemed to incur his ire more than any of the other soldiers.

We spent our evenings at the movies, swimming pool, or post
canteen. The canteen had a soda fountain, a juke box, a dance
floor, a magazine reading room, a game room for ping pong and pool,
and a place with a record player for listening to the records in
the modest library. Sometimes we even had live music. There was
always someone who could play the piano, and many of the players
were very good.  My basic training period lasted through the
summer, so for most of us in that recruit class the swimming pool
was the most popular after-work spot.

The Army barracks scene taught me much about life outside my own
sheltered world. We had no incidents of pilfering, nor were there
any fights.  The main vice was gambling. Every payday there was a
blackjack game and a craps game. Blackjack looked easy and
fascinating, so I tried my hand at it and lost most of my first
month's pay. I seldom lost after that. I watched games, and I
especially studied the players. I learned a lot and fared much
better in later games.

On another occasion I met and played poker with a
professional actuary whose civilian job was with the Prudential
Insurance Company.  He approached the game unemotionally and
analytically. He knew all of the probabilities of card
combinations. He never lost, but he never won much either. A
profitable but uninteresting experience for me!

After a prescribed time of good behavior, we were given weekend
passes.  A pass was good from noon on Saturday or immediately
after Saturday morning inspection until sometime late on Sunday.
The time limit gave the pass-holder too little time to go anywhere
but Abilene, the camp's nearest town.  On my first pass I did not
go into Abilene until Sunday mornmg. I suppose I was unsure about
where I would stay.  Upon arrival I went to church, my first
Lutheran service since arriving in camp (The post Protestant
services were interdenominational).  I then visited Abilene
Christian College. The campus was nice, but those of us who
wandered around there found no social outlet, i.e. girls, so we
went back into town.  Several of us ate dinner in the dining room
of the Grace Hotel, the best eating place in Abilene.  I had filet
mignon. It tasted especially good to me because I was so tired of
the food on the base.

Some of the officers lived with their families in Abilene; thus it
was not uncommon to see an officer and his wife in town shopping.
Enlisted men on pass sometimes strung themselves out in a line so
that an officer coming toward them would be saluted by each of them
in turn. Military courtesy dictated that the officer being saluted
must return the salute. This ploy was especially effective if the
officer were carrying grocery bags in both arms. It would be
better, however, not to do the saluting routine if the officer were
from one's own unit.  He would surely find a way to make each
prankster regret that one salute.

That summer I also learned a little about cock-fighting, an illegal
sport (if you wish to call it a sport) practiced semi-openly in the
back country of central Texas. A member of my platoon was from
Sweetwater, Texas, and he took a few of us to a fighting pit near
his home town. A contest that is just a fight between two birds has
little interest for anyone, not even for the owners, but the
excitement mounts dramatically when there is gambling on the
outcome.  We visitors did not bet but watched bug-eyed as the
action outside the ring was almost as furious as that which went on
inside.

In April, 1991, Ruth and I attended a one-week
Elderhostel on Appalachian culture near Abington, Virginia. The
dormitories were all occupied when we arrived, so we stayed at a
motel in town. The road from our motel to the camp passed a tract
of land with many small enclosures. We were told that each of them
housed a cock specially bred for fighting. The fighting itself was
illegal in Virginia, but raising the birds was not.

Weekly we had a one-, two-, or four-hour hike with full field pack.
One of the hardest parts of the hikes was self-enforced water
discipline. We were allowed only one canteen of water; for each
hike. A canteen holds one quart, and a quart of water was not very
much for a soldier in the hot Texas sun. We got a ten-minute break
every hour, and we tended to gulp water as soon as the break began.
I soon learned to ration mine. The training staff built up our
stamina and hiking abilities carefully so that near the end of
basic training we were ready for an eight-hour hike.

A goldbrick is a malingerer or goof-off. On hike day, the
goldbricks appeared in great numbers as volunteers for supply room
duty, for KP, etc. Sick call always brought out a number of them as
well. Of course the drill sergeants knew what was going on, but
they were powerless to stop the goldbrickers' practices completely.
However, the sergeants were determined that everyone go on the
final eight-hour march.

There was one extremely successful goldbrick, a likable older GI
affectionately called Pop. He seemed always to be able to avoid
difficult or tiring duty. Pop's platoon sergeant was a particularly
loud and obnoxious Regular Army man, and he made it known that he
would see to it that all of his platoon went on the march and that
he would march next to Pop. Early in the march, the sergeant got
blisters on his heels, and he was in real distress. Pop taunted him
continuously: "Carry your pack, Sarge?" "Here, lean on me, Sarge!"
"Hang in there, Sarge. Only twenty miles to go!" The sergeant
finally had to get into the 'meat wagon,' the ambulance that
followed the column of troops. At day's end the sergeant limped
around the compound, and Pop announced that he might go to a dance
that evening. Pop later confided to his barracks-mates that all he
wanted to do was take a shower, go to bed, and sleep for twelve
hours.

We had one four-day field bivouac in early August. The air was so
hot and dusty that I was certain we were training for desert
warfare.  A part of the training routine was learning the proper
use of gas masks. We were made to walk through a room into which
tear gas had been introduced.  Except that a gas mask is
uncomfortable, especially so in hot weather, the drill was easy.  A
soldier tends to get careless: when I was overseas, I rarely knew
for sure where my gas mask was. Non-combatants such as cooks and
truck drivers were even more remiss: they did not always know where
their weapons were.

Another exercise in basic training was running the infiltration
course.  Machine guns at one end of the course fired live
ammunition about eighteen inches off the ground all over the
course. We crawled under the hail of bullets for about a hundred
yards. One had to keep his head down or he would lose it.  No
accident was ever reported from our camp.

The last of the special training exercises was the obstacle course.
We swung across water on ropes Tarzan style, and we came down cargo
nets with full field packs in simulated amphibious landings.  These
are only two of the challenges conjured up by the course designer.

At the end of three months of basic training we were reassigned.
I was offered the opportunity to go back to school in ASTP. I was
also invited to apply for admission to Officer Candidate School.
I probably would have fared better had I chosen OCS instead of
ASTP, but the life expectancy for second lieutenants in front line
units -- whether medics, infantry, or any other branch -- was much
less than that of privates'. For whatever the reason, I chose ASTP
and was sent to Oklahoma A&M (later called Oklahoma State
University) for further testing
and eventual school assignment. The bus trip to Stillwater,
Oklahoma, site of the college, was hot and long, but we passengers
were in good spirits because we were being sent to school.

Isn't it ironic?! When I was at the University of Minnesota and
classified 1-A, I was anxious to end the suspense and go into
Service. Now I was pleased to have the chance to go back to school,
courtesy of Uncle Sam.

My group's quarters at OAM were disappointing. Because we were on a
college campus, I expected to be housed in a dormitory. Instead we
were put into barracks not much different from the ones we had just
left. We were close to the campus and town, however, and even the
Lutheran church was convenient.

The town and the campus were quiet when we arrived because the fall
term had not yet begun. We were encouraged to take advantage of
whatever campus activities there were. I took several classes that
were offered without credit. In one of them, a class in physical
education, I learned a little about fencing.

Again the Yankees and Cardinals played in the World Series. There
was a firehall on the edge of campus, and anytime the firemen were
idle, they had their radio tuned to the game. There were no fire
calls during the Series, so I hung around the firehall and listened
to the games. The Yanks won in five games.

I went to a sorority open house for servicemen. I suppose that we
young men were in great demand, for we were treated very nicely.

One day I was summoned to the orderly room to take a phone call.
My mother was calling from St. Louis. She was at her sisters' home
and hoped I could get away long enough to visit her.  St. Louis is
about five hundred miles from Stillwater, and the most likely means
of getting from one to the other at the time was by bus. The
longest I could be gone was a weekend, and I could not go a
thousand miles by bus in two days. I had to disappoint my mother --
and myself. Had I known some of the things I learned later and had
I been a little more resourceful, I probably could have worked the
problem.

There was a very interesting musician in my hut. He would take a
chair into the shower room and sit and play his clarinet in there
because the floor, ceiling, and walls were hard. He was a very
good player, and the effect was wonderful. Much of what he did
was bluesy, but he also played some Mozart.  Fifty years later our
son Peter makes sounds that remind me of a GI playing in a shower
room -- music haunting and beautiful.

We received our school assignments early enough to begin classes
with the fall quarter or semester. I was sent to Ohio State
University (OSU) in Columbus, Ohio.  Heretofore when I traveled
by rail in the Army, I had always been in a regular railroad car,
either coach or Pullman. This time I was to ride in a troop
railroad car, which was quite different.  Unlike Pullman cars in
which berths ran parallel to the sides of the car, the troop car's
bunks were perpendicular to the sides of the car. Three small bunks
made up each tier with precious little space between tiers. The
only aisle ran along the left wall of the car as one faced the
direction of travel.

Troop cars for all their special appointments were still part of
regularly scheduled passenger trains. The car in front of ours was
a coach crowded with civilians. Wartime travel was always
difficult. Passengers were never guaranteed a seat, and many stood
or sat on the floor.  We opened the door to a civilian car and
talked to some of the people. We were forbidden to enter the
coaches, so we talked from the doorway. I read a lot and played
some cards. Trains were slow during the War, and the trip from
Stillwater to Columbus seemed especially long.  Unlike the Army
barracks in Stillwater which were built to house soldiers, our
quarters at Ohio State were converted from peacetime student
dormitories.  Neal Hall, to which we were assigned, had been a
girls' dorm until it was taken over by the Army for the ASTP
program.

My roommate was married. Married men were given a housing
allowance and were permitted to maintain living quarters
off-campus. I am not sure why my roommate was also given dormitory
space. I practically had a private room.  He was rarely around.

The course work was engineering-oriented.  We took courses in
physics, mathematics, and other subjects. Our only reminder that
we were still in the Army was a series of lectures on mine-laying,
mine-removal, and enemy vehicle and aircraft identification.

Technically, we students were in the Corps of
Engineers. I was thus classified for only a short time, but during
that period I had my only formal picture taken. Thus my insignia
on the frontispiece picture is that of the Corps of Engineers.

Columbus, Ohio, was not a great service town. It had the usual
theaters, night clubs, bars, etc., that any town its size has, but
it had only one United Service Organization. Fort Hayes, a Regular
Army base just outside the city, had several service clubs, so
Columbus was thought to need only one USO. Obviously it was the
favorite hangout for those servicemen not stationed at Fort Hayes.
Local young ladies acted as hostesses and served coffee and
doughnuts. There were ping pong tables, music for dancing, etc.

On December 20, my Grandma Kratzke died. Six days later Grandpa
died. Grandma was eighty-five years old, and Grandpa was
eighty-one. I was informed by telegram. My parents and I agreed
that I would not try to go to Waconia for the funeral because with
the slowness of train or bus travel I probably could not get there
on time anyway.

Minnesota was very cold that December. One night
shortly after my Grandma's death, Grandpa was found wandering
around in his garden, ostensibly looking for some non-existent
horses. He contracted pneumonia and died a few days later.

We were given a few days off over Christmas, and I went to
St. Louis. Had I been able to get a full week I would have gone
home. I traveled by train and thus learned of a local time
convention that was confusing. The city and the railroads observed
different time zones, the former running on central time and the
latter on eastern. Missing a train departure or connection was a
common occurrence.

I met Harvey Sabinson, Tom Bryant, and Don Caldwell at Ohio State.
Harvey had the room next to mine, and I think that Tom was his
roommate. The four of us were to remain friends and stay in
contact with each other for the rest of our Stateside service.
Harvey was the only one I ever saw overseas.

Harvey received a battlefield commission at
Hatten-Rittershoffen, a battle to be considered in detail later.
After the War, officers had to stay in the Army longer than
enlisted men, so he and Sarah, married by that time, moved to
Tacoma -- near Fort Lewis where he was stationed.  Their housing
was less than adequate for the climate, so they hated their stay.
After his discharge, Harvey went to work as a New York theater
publicity agent. He has been very successful: he was awarded a
Tony for his efforts on Broadway. He and Sarah have two sons.
We saw the Sabinsons when we lived in Connecticut and several
other times when we were in the New York area. They visited us in
Bellevue on their way to Alaska.

Tom Bryant became an attorney and lived in New York,
Washington, DC, and Denver. One of Tom's sons was asthmatic, and
his physician recommended Tom and his wife move him to a western
climate. Tom's wife did not like the west, and eventually Tom and
she were divorced. He then married Carol and moved to Bend,
Oregon. He related to me how difficult it was to take the Oregon
bar examination in mid-life. He did pass and set up practice in
Bend.  When our son Bill was working for a legal research firm in
Olympia, Tom engaged Bill to do some work for him. After
inquiries, Tom learned that his consultant was our son. He and I
made contact and have kept in touch ever since.

In February or early March, 1944, the ASTP was closed because
there was need for troops to replace front line casualties.  At
the time we did not know that the invasion of the European
continent would begin on June 6 and that many line divisions were
not fully manned. An untapped source of manpower was the ASTP, so
in the spring of 1944, I found myself on a troop train bound for
Camp Campbell, Kentucky.

In November, 1995, Ruth and I visited Fort Campbell.
The barracks are still there. They are now being used as an
academy for non-commissioned officers. The 101st Airborne Division
is also stationed at the Fort, so it is a very active place

All of the ASTP Gls from Ohio State University were assigned to
the 14th Armored Division stationed there.

An armored division consisted of three tank battalions, three
armored infantry battalions, three field artillery battalions, one
armored engineer battalion, one armored signal battalion, one
armored ordinance battalion, one cavalry reconnaissance battalion,
one armored medical battalion, one armored military police
platoon, and some other headquarters and service organizations.
There was a great deal of difference in the skills required and in
the exposure to danger among the various units of the division.
We were very anxious about our assignments, and because the Army
did little to accommodate the preference of any individual, each
of us was sure that he would wind up as 'cannon fodder' in some
front line organization. For most of us that turned out to be
true.

I was assigned to Headquarters Company of the 25th Tank Battalion.
The only worse assignment would have been the infantry. I think
that Don Caldwell went to the engineers. Both Harvey and Tom were
assigned to the 94th Cavalry. The cavalry was about as bad as the
infantry. Cavalrymen no longer rode horses, but they were still
used as the reconnaissance force, the 'eyes of the Army.' Their
vehicles were fast armored cars and Jeeps, and neither offered
much protection.

Generally, we ASTP soldiers were given a cool reception by the
Army regulars.  We had to prove ourselves to the troops who had
been in the division for a while. There were many references to
those 'smart-ass college kids.' We seemed to get more KP and other
odious chores than the others. Essentially we went through a
hazing period. I remember no unpleasant incidents such as fights,
and eventually most of us were accepted.

Camp Campbell was built on barren Kentucky and Tennessee land.
The place seemed always to be either rainy and muddy or hot and
dusty.  We ASTP soldiers had a lot of catching up to do, so we
spent an inordinate amount of time on the firing range and in the
motor pool. I qualified on all of the required weapons in target
shooting: I was rated expert in the sub-machine gun, sharpshooter
in the carbine, and marksman in the M-1 rifle.  These ratings just
happened to be in the descending order of skills: expert was the
highest that one could attain, sharpshooter the next highest, and
marksman the lowest.  I was never a particularly good shot before
I went into the Service: in fact, I had done very little shooting!

The targets on the firing range were arranged over a long pit.
The pit was below ground level, so there was little danger that
anyone in the pit could be hit.  The target was mounted on a track
so that it could be pulled down for examination after each shot.
A GI in the pit was assigned to each target.  His job was to score
the target shooting and patch the hole in the target after each
firing -- in a way much like a pin-boy's duties in a bowling alley
before there were automatic pin-setters. After each firing, the GI
in the pit would patch the hole, return the target to its
position, and denote the spot the firer had hit by pointing it out
with a colored disc mounted on a long pole. If the firer
completely missed the target, the target tender waved a large
tattered red flag across the target area.  The flag was called
Maggie's drawers, and having Maggie's drawers waved at one was
considered ignominious. I had a few Maggie's drawers waved at me.

In the motor pool we were supposed to become acquainted with
armored vehicles such as tanks, half-tracks, etc. Learning about
them was dirty work and not much fun.  In addition to our
accelerated training program, we did the usual close-order drill
and other activities carried on by the rest of the company.

I was assigned to the Assault Gun Platoon.  An assault gun is a
105mm howitzer mounted in a Sherman tank.  A tank crew has a tank
commander, a gunner, a loader, a bow gunner, and a driver.  The
commander, the gunner, and the loader rode in the turret, and the
bow gunner and the driver stayed down in the bow of the tank, the
driver on the left and the gunner on the right. I began as a
loader, and I would remain the loader with the same crew until we
suffered casualties. Eventually I would also serve as both gunner
and commander.

The food in our company was very good.  The mess sergeant had
worked for a baking company in Chicago, and the chief cook had
been a chef before being called into Service.  Officers had their
own mess, but many of them ate in the enlisted men's because the
food was so much better than in their own.  On Easter Sunday, the
entire officer contingent ate with the enlisted men.  We had
baked ham and pineapple pie.  I am sure that having the officers
eat with us did not make the sergeant and staff of the officers
mess feel very good, even though they got the day off.

The officers mess was an unusual institution.  The
officers paid for their meals and had a private club, so no
enlisted man ever had to do KP in the officers' mess.  However,
if one were called upon for KP there, he was well advised to
cooperate.  Technically one could register a protest, but he would
probably regret doing so.  I personally was never asked to do KP
in the officers mess.

I spent most of my off-duty time with Harvey, Tom, or Don.  I also
began to have friends within the company.  There were ASTP fellows
from other schools, too, and we had a special bond.  I became
close to the members of my tank crew, especially so with Carl
Phillips, the gunner.

Our leisure time on the post was spent drinking beer at the Post
Exchange, playing games in the company day room, writing letters,
or going to the movies.  Movies were first-run and cheap -- and
therefore very popular. War movies were great favorites.

One war movie that deserves especial mention was Chetnicks.  It
was about the exploits of a guerrilla army who harassed the Germans
in Yugoslavia. The movie was exciting, and (of course) the good
guys, the Chetnicks, outwitted the evil Nazis in the end.  There
must have been some element of truth in the story, but it was
surely exaggerated.  The Chetnick guerrilla band was made up of
Serbian patriots led by Colonel Draja Mikhailovich.  When Marshall
Tito went into the hills in 1941 to organize an underground
resistance to the occupying Germans, he found the Chetnicks
already there.  For a time he cooperated with Col. Mikhailovich.
In 1944, the United States and Great Britain switched their
support to Tito.  In 1946, Tito's men captured Mikhailovich in a
Yugoslav cave.  Tito had Mikhailovich executed for collaborating
with the enemy.  The Chetnicks may not have been so heroic as the
picture portrayed them, but we moviegoers of 1943 were none the
wiser.

In March, 1994, Ruth and I attended an
end-of-the-term party for students of a short course about cities
of the Mediterranean.  The host and hostess were Serb-Americans.
They had come to this country in the 1950s.  I observed that as a
young soldier I had been impressed by a movie about Serbian
patriots, who were called Chetnicks. Our host then identified
himself as a former Chetnick.  He showed us a picture of himself
as a Red Cross courier, his 'cover' at the time.

There were several good ping pong players in our company.  Most of
them were young and lean, but one was an older, somewhat fat
fellow named Louie Brill. He seemed a most unlikely type to excel
at anything athletic. But Louie could beat everyone in the
company. His style was strictly defensive: he stood very close to
the table and was able to return any ball driven at him. It was
maddening for some of the fellows who tried hard to win.  I, too,
lost to Louie.

The arrangement of the buildings at Camp Campbell was such that
several rows of barracks were separated from the next group of
barracks by a large field.  The open area was great for throwing a
baseball or football around.  Sometimes we played pick-up games of
touch football or baseball. The post had only one swimming pool.
It was usually crowded, but I went swimming often during the hot
weather anyway.  Our platoon leader arranged for an outing one
Saturday in early summer.  We went to a park that had a lake, a
few rowboats, a swimming beach, and a diving tower.  No one had a
swimming suit.  I cut off my oldest fatigue pants and used them as
swimtrunks.  We had a nice day, but we missed having girls at the
party. In South Pacific, Luther sings, "What ain't we got? We
ain't got dames!" We knew just how he felt!

In the spring, the battalion baseball team was organized.  I went
out for the team but did not make the starting lineup.  I wanted
to catch, but the platoon sergeant for the mortar platoon already
had the position.  He held it already the previous season.  I did
get to play the infield sometimes.  We won about half of our
games.

It was during our Camp Campbell duty that Harvey approached me
with an offer to invest in a Broadway musical show that his
brother was producing.  Harvey assured me that it was going to be
a big hit.  I asked him about the play and about his brother's
record in show business.  His brother had never produced a
successful play, and the new play was by an unknown composer
and writer.  In spite of Harvey's insistence and enthusiasm, I did
not take him up on his offer.  I could not have invested much
money anyway because I had very little.  The musical was Finian's
Rainbow, and the return to the investors was huge.

Camp Campbell was between Hopkinsville, Kentucky, and Clarksville,
Tennessee.  Shortly after arriving at Camp Campbell, I went to
Hopkinsville (Hoptown to the Gls) on a Sunday pass.  I attended a
Missouri Synod church in the morning, but I remember little else
of the day.

The Missouri Synod churches that I attended in
Abilene TX, Stillwater OK, Hopkinsville KY, and Clarksville TN
were all small. I was unprepared for small congregations because
all my life until then I had lived in the Midwest, where
Lutheranism is much stronger than in the South.

Another time I went to Clarksville and found it no more exciting
than Hopkinsville.  When we (usually Don Caldwell and I) had
enough time, we went into Nashville.  We could get to Clarksville
by bus, and we hitchhiked from there to Nashville, a distance of
about forty miles.  Ride-sharing, even hitchhiking, was encouraged
during the War.  Because travel used fuel, advertising campaigns
showed every empty seat in an automobile occupied by a Japanese
soldier.  Some soldier hitchhikers would shout to any passing car
with empty seats, "You've got four (or however many) Japs riding
with you."  I doubt the drivers heard the taunts, but perhaps the
shouters felt better for having blown off a little steam.

Visits to Nashville were entertaining -- if only because we were
off the post.  We stayed at the Maxwell House the first time we
went there. A popular radio program of the time was the Edgar
Bergen-Charlie McCarthy Show.  It wassponsored by Maxwell House
coffee, a company that advertised that its coffee was served at
the gracious old Maxwell House in Nashville.  A colorful old
ante-bellum hostelry it may have been, but it surely was not
nearly so comfortable as the more modern hotel across the street.
Air conditioning was not common in the Forties, and the Maxwell
House rooms were hot and stuffy.  The furnishings, however, were
genuine antiques, and the place was both picturesque and charming.

In Nashville we ate at fine restaurants.  Unlike the camp movie
houses with wooden benches, the Nashville theaters had seats with
cushions and backs.  The first movie that I saw there was
Two Girls and a Sailor.  Centennial Park has a full-scale replica
of the Parthenon on the Athens Acropolis, the only such
replica in the world.  The city's permanent art collection is
housed there.  The Parthenon also contains an impressive
42-foot-high sculpture of the goddess Athena.  Don and I spent
considerable time in the park because it was so very
interesting and different.

The invasion of the European continent, which began on
June 6, 1944, was of great interest to our camp.  In the days
following the June 6 landings, the talk in camp was about nothing
else. "Would the 14th be going soon?" "Might the War in Europe be
over even before we had a chance to fight?" "Did the invasion mean
that we would be going to the Pacific?" We speculated on the
possibilities.

The Missouri Synod Convention was held in St. Louis that summer,
and my father attended.  Unlike my failed effort to visit my
mother in St. Louis when I was in Oklahoma, I managed to obtain a
three-day pass to go see him.  My Uncle Frank's sister Ada, whom
many of my generation called Aunt Ada even though she was not a
blood relative, lived near the stadium in which the St. Louis
Cardinals and the St. Louis Browns played.  Dad went to a ballgame
with some other ministers, and afterwards he stopped at Aunt Ada's
house.

I met him there.  Our time together was far too short. I wished my
mother could have been with us. I missed her.

Aunt Ada was Catholic, and she gave me a St. Christopher Medal.
She told me that she knew I probably did not believe that it would
offer me any protection -- but she believed it would. In the Roman Catholic tradition, St. Christopher is
the patron saint of travelers.  She also
said she would consider it a great personal favor to her if I
carried it. I assured her that I would keep it with me. I did not
wear it on a chain around my neck, but I did indeed have it with
me throughout the War.

The entire division went on maneuvers in  late summer.  The 2nd
Army Tennessee Maneuvers were the largest war games ever
conducted. We were divided into the Red Army and the Blue Army.
The simulated warfare was preparation for the real thing, of
course, and we all sensed that we would be shipped to some combat
zone soon.  I think that our battalion was in the Red Army, but it
really made little difference.  I never knew or cared who won.  I
suppose the generals cared.  We felt a little foolish doing some
of the things required, not unlike kids playing war and shouting
"Bang! You're dead!"

Mostly we just tried to stay comfortable. Several of us slept in
hammocks. I chose to sleep in a hammock for two reasons: I was
afraid of snakes, and I thought that by being elevated I might
catch some of the evening breezes.  The back country of northern
Tennessee is extremely hot and dusty in August.

Once we managed to find a country store and bought some cold soft
drinks.  Another time we came upon a real hill-billy farm that had
a well with cool water.  The owner's dog was not friendly, and the
owner himself eyed us suspiciously.  I do not know why he was
surly.  Dressed in khaki and arriving in a US Army tank, we could
hardly be mistaken for bandits or revenue agents.  He probably had
a still on the property, and to him we represented government
authority. Anyway we got our water.

After the August maneuvers, we were given concentrated
instructions by means of lectures and training films.  Everyone
was tested to check his being ready to perform duties in
accordance with his assigned Military Occupational Specialty
number.  Still the training went on.  We were given pop quizzes in
things like aircraft and vehicle identification.  The airplanes
and vehicles were shown only in silhouette, just black forms, and
we were to identify them quickly.  In combat we would have little time to decide friend or foe! I did very well in the
identification tests, but I never used any of the information.  We
always knew whose planes were overhead, and it would be pretty
hard to mistake an American tank for a German Panzer!

Every man who had not had a furlough during the previous six
months was given one in late August or early September.  We had to
be back in camp before September 20 because we were to go overseas
shortly thereafter.  I was given a two-week furlough in early
September.  I went directly home without stopping to visit
relatives or friends along the way.  I did not do anything special
while in Minnesota, but even so the time seemed to pass very
quickly.  I had to be back on base only a few days before
September 17, my twenty-first birthday.

Before leaving Camp Campbell, the division was responsible for
repairing the barracks and grounds.  The camp was supposed to be
in A-Number-I shape for the next occupants.  We scrubbed walls,
scoured out grease traps in the kitchen, and painted buildings --
just like spring housecleaning!

Finally the division left Tennessee.  We boarded troop trains on a
railroad siding of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad.  I had used the L&N every time I traveled by train. I
would take the L&N north to Evansville, Indiana, and transfer to
the Pennsylvania to go to St. Louis -- or I could take the L&N
through to Chicago if I wanted to go to Minnesota.

Our destination was Camp Shanks, New York. Upon arrival we were
assigned to barracks that could only be regarded as temporary.  It
was now early October, and the weather was turning cold.  Each
structure had one pot-bellied stove.  My bunk was at one end of
the building, and the stove was at the other.  We were instructed
to discard or send home anything white. We were then issued the
same items in olive drab.

When I got married, I still had some GI underwear.
The shorts were secured by two khaki shoestring-like ties drawn
through eyelets on the side of the waist.  In a moment of
frivolity, Ruth replaced the ties with pink satin ribbons.

We were also encouraged to send home as much of our personal
effects as possible.  Aside from the usual toiletries, I took good
dress uniforms, including low-cut shoes (not boots) and some
books. My Prayer Book and New Testament kit supplied by the
Armed Forces Commission of the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod was
especially important.

After three days in camp, I was given a pass to go into
New York City.  Anyone leaving camp was instructed to remove all
patches and other division markings, and he was to do no talking
about his unit.

Harvey Sabinson invited me to his home in Queens.  He and I went
into New York by commuter train and transferred to the subway in
Grand Central Station.  Riding the subway was a new experience for
me.  Harvey was engaged to Sarah, and she arranged for me to go
out with a friend of hers.  At the end of the evening, Harvey told
me to drive his brother's Willys back from Sarah's house to his
parents' apartment.  I do not remember any details of the evening
or where I was in Queens when I was sent packing, but I do
remember driving to the Sabinsons' in the dark.  I marvel that I
found my way without any great trouble.
(Footnote 17: A "Willys" was a small car of the Thirties. It was
about the size of a Volkswagon 'bug' and a predecessor to the
compacts of today.

A New York theater company put on Porgy and Bess in the camp
theater.  Attending the production turned out to be a rare
opportunity for us Gls because William Warfield played Porgy.  The
consensus among critics at the time was that his characterization
defined the role.  I did not fully appreciate how good
the presentation was, but I certainly enjoyed seeing the play!
(Footnote 18: Paul Robeson was another great Porgy.

The 1944 World Series was played during my Port of Embarkation
stay.  We had a radio in the barracks and listened as much as we
could.  All the games were day games, and all were played in
St. Louis.  The lowly St. Louis Browns won in the American League
and the St. Louis Cardinals in the National League.  Neither team
was very good: too many of the players had been drafted into the
Armed Forces.  The Cardinals won in six games.

There was a lot of letter writing going on in the barracks, and I
experienced my first mail censorship. All outgoing mail was read
by an officer, and any hint of where we were or where we might be
going was carefully removed with
a razor blade.  We were not even supposed to indicate that we were
at an East Coast Port Of Embarkation.  I wrote home several times.
I had little to say except that I missed everybody.  I wondered
what my parents suspected.  They surely must have known that I was
going overseas.

The few days in Camp Shanks ended my Stateside service. My next
stop would be someplace in Europe.





Chapter III: Destination: European Theater of Operations

Preserve my life from fear of the enemy.  (Psalm 64:1, KJV)

We sailed on the USS Santa Rosa.  For the superstitious the
departure seemed ominous: the date was Friday, October 13, 1944.
From Camp Shanks, New York, we went by truck to the ferryboat that
would take us to Staten Island.  At the dock an Army band played
On Wisconsin, On Brave Old Army Team, and The Notre Dame Victory
March.  Red Cross ladies dispensed coffee, candy bars, and
doughnuts.  The Santa Rosa had been a South American cruise ship
before being pressed into service transporting troops.  If anyone
expected her accommodations to be posh, he was in for a
disappointment, for she had been stripped of her fancy
appointments and refitted to accommodate as many men as possible.
Our battalion's quarters were deep in the hold and far up in the
bow of the ship.
In civilian parlance, that means inside, below deck,
in the forward part of the vessel.

In rough seas the bow went up like an express elevator and slammed
down just as fast.  Our bunks -- really hammocks -- were in tiers
of four.  I managed to get a bottom bunk.  Usually it was very hot
in the top bunk, and climbing up to it was always difficult.  In
addition to his hammock, each soldier was allotted floor space for
his duffel bag. A packed duffel bag is about three or four feet
long and fifteen to eighteen inches in diameter.  Thus each
bag used a lot of space, and we were very crowded.  We had no
fresh water for personal hygiene: we took saltwater showers and
shaves, and the water was almost always cold.

Sailing day was cool and clear.  After we passed the Statue of
Liberty, the call "All military personnel clear the decks!" came
over the public address system.  I risked being reprimanded by
staying on deck until the ship entered the open sea; I wanted to
see what the ocean was like.  I got seasick, but just this once.
I was glad I had risked being caught topside because those below
got seasick.

The ships in our convoy assembled soon after leaving New York.  A
full armored division requires about thirty-five ships.  The
convoy had a number of destroyers as a protective escort.  The
German U-boat (submarine) threat had been neutralized by 1944, but
we were still glad to have the Navy escort ships with us.  We
could see the constantly moving destroyers weaving through the
convoy like skiers running a slalom course, and we found them
reassuring.
(Footnote 2: Carl Sealander, a friend of mine at Boeing, served on
a destroyer.  He said that destroyers were fast and maneuverable
and that their motion induced a lot of seasickness for all aboard.
Son Tom, as a civilian scientist, went to sea on a destroyer out
of Hawaii in 1992.  He, too, attested to a destroyer's rough ride.

Along with the coffee and doughnuts, the Red Cross gave each GI a
kit containing a razor, a toothbrush, a tube of toothpaste, a bar
of toilet soap, a candy bar, and a paperback novel.  My book was
Forever Amber; it told the story of Amber St. Claire, mistress of
England's Charles II.  It was not very steamy by today's
standards; but it was considered racy then.  Other than reading,
the most popular pastime was playing games -- poker, bridge, and
craps.  I won a little money playing poker.  There were a few
harmonica players in our section of the hold.  They usually played
sad and plaintive songs, and sometimes other Gls would sing along.
Movies were shown every night in the mess hall.

The division band was on our ship, so in good weather we had band
concerts on the open deck.  We had a burial at sea.  We never
learned how the young officer died.  We had several boat drills.
My lifeboat assignment happened to be close to our deck assembly
area.

There was a rumor that one of the ships in the convoy carried a
contingent from the Women's Army Corps.  Every pair of field
glasses was put to use, but no one ever saw a girl.  I am almost
certain that no ship in the convoy had any WACs aboard and that
all the ships carried only combat troops.

During daylight hours most Gls spent as much time as possible on
deck. Our convoy sailed a southern route, so the weather was mild.
We did not know where we were, of course, nor did we know where we
were going.  I often stood at the rail at night and watched the
phosphorescence of the waves.  I found the new phenomenon
mesmerizing, quite like a native of equatorial latitudes seeing
the Northern Lights for the first time.

We ate meals standing up at counter-like tables.  The mess hall
had been a ballroom when the Santa Rosa was a cruise ship.  A piano
bolted to the floor was a relic of another time.  We ate only two
meals a day, but we did not mind because the food was so terrible.
Breakfast was served for five hours, and the unpleasant smell of
powdered eggs permeated the mess hall, the passageways, and even
some sleeping quarters.  Efficiency foods were not yet
well-developed in 1944.  Even the soluble coffee (and the only kind in that era ws Nescafe) was pretty bad.
I bought twenty-four bars of candy at the ship's Post Exchange,
and they helped sustain me.
(Footnote 3: Passageway is the nautical term for hall.  A ceiling
aboard ship is referred to as an "overhead," a wall as a
"bulkhead," etc.

Just before our ship entered the Strait of Gibraltar, a pod of
porpoises came along side. They acted as if they were performing
for spectators -- just like the porpoises and whales in the famous
aquaria of Baltimore and Vancouver. Most of the soldiers, myself
included, had never seen a porpoise, so the playful and somewhat
hammy aquatic mammals enjoyed a large and appreciative audience.

Seeing the Rock of Gibraltar for the first time was very exciting.
The African side of the strait was arid and featureless, the city
of Tangier gleaming white.  The rock was more than a tourist
attraction to us, of course: it meant we were going either to
France or to Italy.  The Mediterranean was much rougher than the
Atlantic had been.  Almost all the Gls got seasick.  Fortunately,
I managed to weather the storm without that terrible scourge.  The
seas were so rough that when the stern rose out of the water, I
could see the propellers turning.  There was no water to resist
them, so they turned very fast and set up a horrendous vibration.
I felt as if the ship were going to shake apart.

After a few days in the Mediterranean, we approached the coast of France. By
then we had determined that Marseilles would be our destination. We passed
the gray pile of rock of the Chateau d'if which, incidentally,  is the prison
from which Edmond Dantes, the hero of Alexander Dumas' novel Count of Monte
Crisco, escaped.

In the distance we could see a huge
cathedral, a common feature of French skylines. Very carefully our convoy
followed the channel that was marked through the mines. I don't recall seeing
any other ships from our division's convoy. Marseilles as a pre-War port could
surely have accommodated all the ships of our convoy, but the city had been
severely bombed and now offered only limited facilities. Moreover, thirty-five
Allied ships in one place would have made a good target for the German
Luftwaffe.

Barrage balloons were tethered all over the port facilities and parts of the city.
Masts and funnels of sunken ships showed above the harbor's waterline. The
waterfront warehouses were badly damaged. We soon had our first glimpse of
the War's impact on the civilian populace. An apartment building had been hit
by a bomb: its outer wall was completely gone, so we could look directly into
the units. In one of the apartments, a table teetered on the edge of an exposed
floor, and a sink dangled out over empty space.

The Santa Rosa docked beside a ship that had been sunk, and our engineers
quickly built a passageway through its wreckage. We did not go down
a gangplank to reach the receiving dock; instead we went along a path through
the tangled equipment on the deck of the sunken ship. Because the deck was
not level, walking while carrying a duffel bag and whatever other gear each of
us had was precarious. Also, staggering across that tilted deck induced
seasickness in many of us, even without the deck's being in motion. Many of
the fellows did not know one can become nauseous from taking his eyes off
some frame of reference (such as the horizon), and some were embarrassed to
find themselves feeling sick on a motionless deck.
(Footnote 6: I once experienced seasickness on the tilted deck of a wrecked ship
at Ocean Shores.

After docking and disembarking, the Santa Rosa passengers began the long
march to the staging area. We had been told that the march would be a short
one. It turned out to be eight miles long, all of it uphill. On the way we
encountered children soliciting anything that they thought they could get.
'Cigarette pour papa,?' 'Bon bons?' Chocolat?'

Without the War, I might have been fascinated by the novelty of a foreign city.
There were sidewalk cafes, unusual houses, the ever-present pissoirs (men's
toilets), etc. I found it strange to see a man in his fifties, dressed in a business
suit and black hat, riding a bicycle with a fishing creel and rod tied to the
handlebars.

The Delta Base Bivouac Area near the town of La Malle was our next
destination. It was almost dark when we arrived there. An advance party had
already put up our tents, so we could get into our quarters immediately.

In contrast to the awful food aboard the Santa Rosa our first food in France was
very good. Major William E. Shedd, III, our battalion S-2 (i.e., Intelligence)
officer, was fond of
pancakes and maple syrup. He brought with him enough bottles of Mapleine
extract to last a long time, to make many gallons of imitation maple syrup. The
directions were simple: heat white refined sugar and water over low heat and
add the extract. The results were not exactly Vermont maple syrup, but what
the heck?  We didn't have a gourmet grocery store handy. Our mess sergeant
obliged us and the major by serving pancakes and maple(ine) syrup the very
next morning.

Major Shedd learned of the birth of his first child, a boy, during our stay at the
staging area. He was told that the little fellow's first step would have to be on
his left foot because in military drill a soldier always steps off on his left foot.

That day we had our first fresh-water showers since leaving Camp Shanks.
The shower room was a portable affair rigged up in a large tent -- much
like the showers in M*A*S*H. A shower was a real luxury!

Our toilet facilities seemed strange to us, to say the least. They were built by
local laborers and were not unusual by French standards. The accommodations
were nothing more than a row of outhouses without walls, right out in
the open. The row of box-like things was placed in a line beside a path used by
the local citizenry. A friend of mine told me that during his first use of the
open-air latrine, a middle-aged lady appeared on the path and tried to engage
him in conversation. He said he was so embarrassed that all he could do was
look at his shoes and mumble·. Thus informed, I managed to find ways to avoid
similar incidents. Forewarned is forearmed!

The equipment for the division arrived in bits and pieces. When our tank was
delivered, we had to make it combat-ready. The guns, including the tank's
main 105mm howitzer, were protected from the elements with a coat of
something called Cosmoline. Even the gun barrels were filled with it.
Cosmoline is the messiest, greasiest gunk I have ever come across, and
removing it was a dirty, tiring job.

After all the preparation, each tank was supposed to proceed to a designated
area for weapon testing. (In the States we would have called the place a firing
range, and great care would have been taken to keep people away. In France it
was just a space civilians had vacated -- at least we hoped they had!) The route
to our test firing area went through the lovely town of Aix-en-Provence.
Unlike Marseilles, which was bustling and dirty, Aix-en-Provence was southern
France at its most charming. The town center with a stone fountain and
cobblestone street was very pretty. It was autumn and cool, but even so old
men sat around outside and talked politics or commented on the arrival of more
American troops.

Unfortunately there was also a grimness about the place.
Someone who collaborated with the Nazis had been hanged in the town square
shortly before our arrival. Though we did not witness the incident, we were
Septemes, a nearby village, where we loaded the tanks onto flatcars.
Driving one tank or half-track onto a flatcar does not take long, but all the
vehicles were to be loaded before any train could leave. Though somewhat
restricted during this period, we did manage to spend time in both Septemes
and in Marseilles.

It was in a small Septemes cafe that I had my first vin ordinaire or cheap table
wine. It wasn't to be my last. The barkeep complimented me on my French
pronunciation. Very likely he was only trying to be nice, or perhaps he
considered it advantageous to flatter any soldier in his bar, no matter what his
uniform. My only French came from a Berlitz book I studied during the long
Atlantic crossing.

One day four of us went into Marseilles. We hopped a very crowded streetcar;
some passengers even hung onto the outside of the car. We could not buy
anything, but we found the sights interesting. American Military Police were
all over. Two of us were content to stay out of trouble, but Eddie B---, our
driver, and Ray 'Shorty' F, the driver of another tank -- both married
men -- wanted to find the red light district. If the MPs caught a GI patronizing
a house of ill repute, the GI was arrested and subject to summary court martial.
Besides not actually wanting to go into a 'house,' I was scared to death of being
found anywhere in the neighborhood of one. The four of us had to stick
together to get back to Septemes, so Carl Phillips and I agreed to wait in a bar
across the street -- actually an alley. Before we left, we went as far as the front
door of the 'establishment' so that Eddie and Shorty could consult with the
madam and confirm that there were indeed girls available. All I could see was
a smoky, dimly-lit room, and yes, it was done in red. Pretty unimpressive! Carl
and I were extremely nervous while waiting. Eventually the other two rejoined
us, and we left the alley without MP notice. So much for Marseilles! I did not
visit a single cathedral or museum -- but I did see the inside of a French
whorehouse.

The crews were split up when the time came for our railway trip up the Rhone
Valley. Two men from each crew were assigned to accompany their crew's
vehicle on the flatcar. Carl and Eddie, our gunner and driver, were assigned to
go with our tank. Theirs was a lousy deal. It was much colder riding outside
with the vehicles than it was traveling inside the boxcars, and those on the
noisy flatcars were much more lonesome than the rest of us, who could talk to
each other.

Our short stay on the railroad siding near Septemes marked the end of our easy
duty in France. From then on, until the end of the War, we were always
conscious of enemy presence and the nearness of battle.

Bill breaks from his autobiographical memoirs to insert the following
historical narrative about Alsace

Chapter IV: Alsace

The corner of eastern France known as Alsace was very important for both the
Allied and the Axis forces. in 1944 and 1945. The Germans' attempt to break
through the Allied lines in the Ardennes, known as the Battle of the Bulge, had
failed. The German High Command then made the decision to try
a breakthrough via the Wissembourg Gap in Alsace. The Germans called the
second offensive action Nordwind.

The Allies had to counter the German offensive and protect Strasbourg, a city
known as the Jewel of Alsace. Strasbourg had been won by the Allies, and to
abandon her would have meant terrible reprisals on the civilian population.
French General Charles de Gaulle convinced General Dwight D. Eisenhower,
Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces, that the city had to be protected.
So for both strategic and political reasons, the campaign in Alsace took on
great importance. Moreover, Alsace has always been a controversial piece of
ground, lying as it does on the borders of two neighboring powers, France and
Germany.

The 14th Armored Division landed at Marseilles in October, 1944, and
proceeded up the Rhone Valley towards the western foothills of the Vosges
Mountains. Elements of the Seventh Army had already made the march during
the summer of 1944, so resistance was relatively light when the 14th AD
followed in the fall. The troops called the engagement The Champagne
Campaign. Besides being a facetious or clever label for a troop movement, the
name indicated that the Army traveled through the Champagne region of
France.

When the 14th AD reached the mountains, conditions changed drastically.
Now part of the Seventh Army, the division faced battle conditions seldom -- if
ever -- encountered before. The history, the terrain, the weather, and the
people all favored the enemy.

Military historians divide the action from the approach to the Vosges
Mountains in October, 1944, to the crossing of the Rhine in April, 1945, into
two battles -- the battle of the High Vosges and the battle of the Low Vosges.
In times of war, the Vosges Mountains have always been a refuge and a great
defensive bastion. Many Germans refer to the southern Vosges as the Hardt Mountains.
They rise dramatically from the Rhine Valley near Belfort
to peaks over four thousand feet in elevation. The mountain chain runs
parallel to the Rhine and is separated from it by the broad Alsatian plain, which
is about thirty miles across and ninety miles long. It descends to its northern
terminus near the Lauter River.  The southern part is called the High Vosges
because it has a greater elevation than the northern section.

The northern
part, though not quite so elevated as the southern, is more rugged and difficult
to traverse.
During the dim pre-history of Alsace (several hundred years B.C.), an
unidentified Celtic people who inhabited the Vosges constructed a wall three
meters high and ten kilometers long around the mountain peak Fliehburg,
which is near the modern town of Obernai. Known as the Heidenmauer, it is
one of the earliest-known fortifications in the Vosges Mountains. The Vosges
cordillera has been regarded as nearly impenetrable ever since.
(Footnote 2: Heidenmauer means heathen wall. It was named for its pre-Christian origins. The site
became a shrine to St. Odilia, patron saint of Alsace.

In medieval times the Vosges became a barrier between empires. In 843, the
Treaty of Verdun divided the Frankish Empire among the three sons of
Charlemagne -- Louis the German, Charles the Bold, and Lothair. Louis the
German took the lands to the east, Charles the Bold the lands to the west.
Lothair's portion lay in between and included the Vosges and all of modernday
Alsace and Lorraine. As with many 'middle' lands throughout history,
Lotharingia (from which Lorraine is derived) became a battleground for the
armies of subsequent neighboring rulers.

The Vosges region was never
crossed by force of arms during the medieval period. By 925 the Vosges
region and all of Alsace and Lorraine had become part of the German duchy of
Swabia and were thus integrated into the Holy Roman Empire.
The politics of the time were very complicated. Alsace was far away from
the Houses of Hohenstaufen and Hapsburg, the main seats of power. To the
Hohenstaufens and Hapsburgs, Alsace seemed a distant border region, and
they paid scant attention to it. There were frequent conflicts between local
landowners, however, but no outsider ever conquered Alsace -- much less
crossed the Vosges.

The Peasants' War of 1524-25 added several pages to the chronicles of armed
conflict in the Vosges. A religious war in its inception, the Peasants' War
became a political and social conflict as well. The Reformation in Saxony
fueled the flame of religious dissent among the Alsatian peasants, and the
craggy contour of the mountains carved the region into a strange mosaic of
Lutheran, Calvinist, and Roman Catholic enclaves, which were often separated
by only a single ridge or valley. The region remained a bloody battleground for
the forces of religious reaction for many years.
(Footnote 3: Martin Luther nailed his 95 theses to the door of the castle church in Wittenberg in 1517. The
incident is considered the beginning of the Reformation.

Throughout the Middle Ages, the ruling parties of the area built mountain
fortresses similar to the castles along the Rhine. These fortresses effectively
blocked east-west passage through the mountains except by permission of
their inhabitants, and there was also no easy transit from west to east, from
France into the lands of the Holy Roman Empire.

For almost seven centuries Alsace remained under German domination. With
the Peace of Westphalia, which ended the Thirty Years' War in 1648, Alsace
became French. Alsace actually became part of France with the Treaty of
Ryswick in 1697. Louis XIV, then ruler of France, had his military engineers
restore and improve the mountain fortifications of this border region. From
the end his reign in 1715 until the time of the French Revolution, Alsace
enjoyed a long period of peace.
(Footnote 4: In 1985, Ruth and I stayed at an inn in Obernai that had been the quarters for the region's
Governeur-General, Louis' representative in Alsace.

During the Revolution and the Napoleonic
Wars, Alsace provided France with some of her bravest and best soldiers.
After German domination for so long, the people continued to speak German,
much to the consternation of the French. Napoleon once said of the Alsatians,
"Let them speak German so long as they fight in French."

Following the Napoleonic Wars, the next conflict involving Alsace and the
Vosges Mountains was the Franco-Prussian War in 1870-71. The Vosges
continued to be impenetrable. The French strengthened their fortresses, and
the attacking Germans wisely chose to avoid the mountains and their
fortifications and drove into France farther north. Both Alsace and Lorraine
were ceded to the Germans after 1871.

Although some fighting took place in the Vosges mountains during World War
I, the region was spared much bloodshed because neither side seriously tried
to force its way through the passes. However, the relatively static nature of
trench warfare in the rest of France spread into Alsace.

Alsace and Lorraine reverted to the French at the end of World War I. Not long
after the Treaty of Versailles, the French government decided to take strong
defensive measures to insure that the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine would
remain part of France. In the 1930s under the leadership of Andre Maginot, an
Alsatian-born World War I veteran and war minister, France embarked on the
most ambitious project of permanent fortification in modern times.

The Maginot Line was a series of state-of-the-art emplacements that included
underground living quarters, a hospital, supply arsenals, etc. This system
guarded the Franco-German frontier for 192 miles, beginning at the Swiss
border and running north along the west bank of the Rhine. Just north of
Strasbourg it veered northwest toward Hatten. (Mark the name!) It then went
on through Alsace and passed the northern end of the Vosges. The heavy
fortifications continued past the mountains, and an irregular series of lighter
pill-box defensive works ran all the way to the English Channel.

In World War II, the Vosges terrain favored the German defensive forces. Gen.
Eisenhower's broad front strategy gave the Seventh Army the task of crossing
the entire Vosges chain, not just the Low Vosges. This unprecedented feat
would have to be followed by a penetration of the formidable German-held
Maginot fortifications and a Rhine River crossing, all in the worst of winter.
The Vosges mountain vegetation compounded the American's difficulties
because the coniferous evergreens offered concealment to enemy gun
emplacements and snipers.

Even communication favored the Germans, who used amplitude modulation (AM)
radios. American soldiers used frequency modulation (FM) radios, which were lineof-
sight devices with limited range.

In closing, a word about the Alsatian people in 1945.

The Alsatian people lived under different flags over the centuries, so one never
knew where an Alsatian's allegiance lay. Most Alsatians seemed cooperative,
but their demeanor varied. Sometimes they would be animated and pleasant,
and at other times they seemed taciturn and impassive -- but always they were enigmatic.

Dad continues to provide a historical perspective in Chapter V:

Chapter: V The High Vosges Mountain Campaign, November, 1944

In the summer of 1944, the Allied troops landed on the Normandy beaches and
fought their way toward Belgium, Luxembourg, and eastern France. Other
Allied troops, mostly American Army units, landed in southern France and
moved up the Rhone Valley. The two forces met and held a continuous line
from the Alps to the North Sea. The southern end of the Allied line was held by
elements of the VI Corps, which included the Seventh Army. One of the
divisions of the Seventh Army was the 14th Armored Division.

The German West Wall lay ahead and barred the way into the German
Fatherland. The West Wall was made up of the Rhine River and, west of the
river, the Siegfried Line. The Siegfried Line consisted of pillboxes, concrete
bunkers with machine guns and cannons. Rows of dragon's teeth, cement
structures built on bases about four feet square and four feet high, were
further deterrents to invading Germany. The Siegfried Line faced the Maginot
Line along the French frontier and continued northward along the BelgianGerman
and Dutch-German borders. The Maginot Line, built as a French
defense but held by the Germans in 1944, was a chain of underground
fortifications and ground-level gun ports.

East of the Vosges Mountains and just north of the Swiss border was the
Colmar Pocket. The Germans were entrenched there and had a clear path to
the northeast, should they want to escape to the West Wall.
The mission of the 14th AD was to cross the Vosges Mountains and cut off any
German units moving northeast towards the Maginot Line.

The 25th Tank Battalion was part of Combat Command A. The combat
command's assignment was to move into the Vosges Mountains on two nearly
parallel roads. The Germans occupied fortified positions in the Vosges, and
the terrain gave them a decided advantage. The movement of armor through
mountainous country had never been attempted in modern warfare because it
was considered too hazardous.

Selected elements of the 25th Tank Battalion were split off from the main body
at several junctures. The Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon was given
the mission of reconnoitering {surveying} routes to St. Die. A company of
tanks was sent to protect the flank of Battalion Trains, the unit of trucks that
carried personal duffel bags, extra supplies, etc. A platoon of tanks from
D Company was dispersed to provide security for a part of Division Trains.

On the second day of travel into the mountains, the mission was changed, and
the 14th AD was transferred from VI Corps to XV Corps. The new mission was
to capture the town of Barenbach. The I and R Platoon took off immediately
on reconnaissance. Their mission was to find the best route to the town.

During much of the march through the mountains, the 14th AD shared the
roads with the 3rd and 103rd Infantry Divisions. Those divisions had road
priority, so movement was slow and sometimes frustrating. Idle division
vehicles were like sitting ducks for enemy snipers and anti-tank weapons.

At St. Quiren, the head of the column encountered a roadblock. A roadblock
in the mountains was especially troublesome because there were no alternate
roads for detour. With no--choice but to blast through the block, the column,
after still another encounter with the enemy, continued on its way.

Thanksgiving fell on November 23 in 1944. The troops fighting through the
mountains had C rations for their Thanksgiving dinner.

While the 14th AD was fighting its way through the mountains, the French 1st
Armored Division struck north and captured Strasbourg. The taking of
Strasbourg was important to French morale. With this fortuitous turn
of events, the Allied High Command considered turning Combat Command A
loose and having it head straight for the Rhine. The element of risk was too
great, however, and an alternate plan had to be devised.

On Friday, November 25, the 25th Tank Battalion arrived at Le Donon on the
eastern side of the Vosges. At nearby Schirmeck, all units of the 25th rejoined
the main body, and the battalion was off on its own. The column wound down
the foothills of the mountains onto the Alsatian plain.

On Monday, November 27, CCA turned south and headed for its immediate
objective -- to seize and hold a fifteen-mile line running roughly north and
south, four miles from the Rhine and parallel to it. The line of battle was in
three columns, the westernmost led by the 25th Tank Battalion.

The western column moved out before dawn. The day was clear, and the
sunrise out of Germany was pink. A reconnaissance platoon of armored cars
and Jeeps led the column.

As the column entered the town of Obernai, the Recon Platoon learned that the
enemy was in Goxwiller, the next village.
Several tanks had to destroy a roadblock at the outskirts of Goxwiller while
under heavy machine-gun and mortar fire.

Gertwiller was the next village on the march south. Elements of the supporting
500th Field Artillery fired on that village to cut off-the retreating Germans.

A few hundred yards before entering Gertwiller, the lead vehicles encountered
another roadblock, this one covered by machine guns. The 76mm guns of the
lead tanks could not reduce the obstacle, so the Assault Gun Platoon with its
105mm howitzers was called upon to do the job.

The infantrymen dismounted and moved slowly and cautiously into Gertwiller.
They continued down the main street until they reached the far end of the
town. Except for intermittent artillery and mortar fire, they met little resistance
from the Germans.

Night was falling, but still the tank column continued into town, each tank firing
as it went. A blown bridge over a canal barred the way, and an alternate route,
suggested by the mayor, proved to be a trap. A camouflaged German 88mm
anti-tank gun fired at the lead tanks at almost point-blank range.

After the gun was silenced, no resistance was encountered by the remaining
tanks in their one- or two-block movement down to the canal. Engineers from
the 125th Engineer Battaliofl erected a foot bridge while under fire so the tank
crew members could escape.

Soon all of Gertwiller erupted into flame. Infantrymen from B-62 ran from
house to house, tossing grenades through windows and doors as they went.
Tanks roared incessantly. The Germans, hiding in houses and cellars, waited
for an opportune time to come out. Enemy snipers fired from second story
windows.

After an hour or two, the furious action stopped, and the town became eerily
quiet. Lieutenant Morris Wax of the 25th's Service Company began to direct
his supply trucks into town. The tanks were low on both gas and ammunition.
The Battalion Command Post was set up in a tavern on the main street of town.
Lieutenant Lloyd Sexton, battalion surgeon, set up an aid station in the cellar
of an Obernai house, but he had to move to larger quarters in the town
schoolhouse because the number of casualties became too large for him to
handle in the cellar.

The quiet was only temporary. At 3:30 A.M. on November 27, the Germans
began their counter-attack with a huge artillery barrage. German infantry had
infiltrated the outposts around the town.

One soldier related how he learned of their presence. He went out into the
street to fetch a gas can and drew machine-gun fire from a direction he
thought to be occupied by his own troops.

After some furious street fighting, the Americans were ordered to withdraw.
The infantrymen of B-62 found that withdrawal was more easily ordered than
accomplished. Germans were everywhere. Prone men would wait for a burp
gun to stop and then rise and shoot in the direction from which the muzzle
flashes came.

Ammunition handlers crawled into town with ammo and helped medics
evacuate the wounded on their return.

The men of the 1st Infantry Platoon of 8-62 were pinned down and faced
annihilation. The last order they received was Hold at all costs! The daring
and heroic action of one man saved them. His name was Kenesaw Goheen.
For his bravery he received the Distinguished Service Cross.
Private Goheen was a rifleman in the 1st Platoon, the platoon to be hit first by
the Germans in their counter-attack. During the night Goheen took it upon
himself to knock out the German machine gun emplacement that was keeping
his platoon pinned down. Without asking any questions, he emerged from the
relative safety of his secured position and advanced toward the gun. The
Germans spotted him and fired at him with all they had. He crawled through
a continuous shower of heavy machine gun, burp gun, and rifle fire as bullets
kicked up dirt all around him. He crawled on, and eventually he knocked out
the machine gun nest with a hand grenade.

Goheen was not even touched. His grenade killed two of the Germans, and he
took the third one prisoner. Goheen made the prisoner crawl back to his
platoon ahead of him.

Then another machine gun began to fire at the 1st Platoon, and again Goheen
crawled toward it. On his way, he encountered a man from the anti-tank
platoon who was wounded and in great pain. Goheen half carried, half
dragged him back through heavy fire. According to the 62nd Battalion
surgeon, Goheen saved the man's life.

Later that night, Goheen worked his way through more heavy fire to get
ammunition. He returned just as the platoon was about to run out of ammo.
The next morning, November 28, Goheen learned that the 1st Platoon was
completely cut off. Three messengers had returned after trying to get through
to the isolated platoon, but murderous enemy fire prevented their
accomplishing the mission. Goheen and a lieutenant from his platoon
volunteered to go. They had to cross open terrain, and the enemy had a clear
field of fire. They crawled, ran, dodged -- whatever -- to get through, and they
made it without a scratch. Then they led the 1st Platoon out of the town.

Among the Americans left in the town were some men of the 25th Tank
Battalion. They got out about the same time as the 1st Platoon of B-62. The
battalion commander of the 25th left his Command Post and made it out of
town in the early dawn. The last men of the 25th to leave were the stragglers
from the AG platoon. They had to fend for themselves.

After renewed attacks and more bitter fighting, all elements of the 14th AD
escaped. The mortar platoon from the 25th continued to shell Gertwiller from
a position north of town. Men from the 25th Tank, the 125th Engineers, the
94th Cavalry, and the 62nd Infantry set up a defensive position in Goxwiller.
The infantry dug in, and the armored vehicles set up tactical positions with
their hulls hidden by terrain. The defensive preparations were unnecessary.
The attack never came.

The 25th then renewed its attack on Gertwiller. Captain John J. Scanlon,
battalion intelligence officer, and Lieutenant John W. Day of the I and R
Platoon succeeded in getting into town in a Jeep. They found some wounded
men from B-62 and helped them to the rear.

In the ensuing action, several tanks were knocked out, and the 25th pulled
back in order to concentrate artillery fire on the town. After an extremely
heavy barrage, the 25th again moved into Gertwiller. The 125th erected
a bridge over the canal, and finally the town was declared clear of the enemy.

Having broken out onto the broad Alsatian plain, the 14th AD and attached
units turned to the northeast. The general movement was west of Strasbourg,
toward the corner of Alsace where the Lauter and Rhine Rivers meet.

In Chapter VI, Dad resumes his autobiographical account as he relates
his part in the battle just described.

Chapter VI: BAPTISM OF FIRE

After loading the tanks and half-tracks onto flatcars, the crews -- except for the
men assigned to ride on the flatcars with the vehicles -- boarded the unheated
train, but we were comfortable enough anyway. We had warm clothing and
sleeping bags. We prepared our meals over portable Coleman burners. The
train made some bathroom stops, but not enough. We never knew when
the French engineer would start moving after a stop, so some guys got left
behind. A backup train picked up stragglers.

We first saw evidence of combat on the trip up the Rhone Valley. We had seen
bombed warehouses, docks, even homes and businesses -- but no actual
battlefields. Grim reminders of what had happened were burned-out tanks and
dead horses. No modern army had mounted cavalry, but the Germans still used
horses as draft animals to pull artillery pieces and supply wagons. The burnedout
tanks had a sobering effect on everyone.

The 14th Armored Division, part of the Seventh Army commanded by General
Alexander M. Patch, Jr., was to join the Seventh Army in the Vosges Mountains
of Alsace. The name Alsace or Alsace-Lorraine rang a bell with me and
probably for every GI who remembered his high school history lessons. In
those almost-forgotten classes we learned that the region along the west bank
of the Rhine immediately north of Switzerland had been contested in many
wars and that the region flew the flag of its most recent conqueror. Now I was
to become a part of Alsatian history: it would be for my fellow soldiers and me
to change the flag of Alsace from a German Swastika to the French Tri-Color.

After three days' travel in the 40 et 8 cars, we arrived in Charmes, a small town
near Epinal and Dijon (of mustard fame). It was rainy and cold. We spent a miserable first night
in the field. We made our tarp into a half-tent. As the rain came down outside,
the water came up under our tarp, and our sleeping bags got wet. We all
caught colds, and several of the guys had the Gls, an army euphemism for
diarrhea. Because the fields were so
wet, we had to build corduroy roads with logs cut from the local forests.

Officials from the French villages or townships counted every log and
submitted a bill of damages to the Army. One GI expressed his reaction with
the expletive The gall of some Gauls!! -- or to put it another way, That7s some
Gallic gall! We were annoyed with the French officials, of course, but even so
we took delight in the alliterative expressions of disdain.

The 14th AD became part of VI Corps, Seventh Army, which was fighting its
way through the Vosges Mountains. Some of its peaks are over four thousand
feet high. The roads were typical mountain roads of that time: they were
narrow with steep cliffs rising on one side and deep ravines plunging away on
the other. We were afraid they might crumble under the weight of our heavy
equipment. The terrain favored defense, and the Germans used their advantage
well. The woods were full of their snipers and fortified dug-in gun
emplacements.
(Footnote 3: Fighting with armor in the mountains was not common because it was considered too
difficult. Hannibal crossed the Alps with forty elephants already in the third century B.C., but
in modern warfare mountain fighting is generally avoided.
(Footnote 4: Ruth and I drove through the same mountains in 1985. By then the road had been replaced
by a multi-lane toll expressway.

Somewhere along the way, a tank from A Company hit a mine. Several of the
crew members were injured, and the tank was immobilized. The column that
followed was held up while Service Company retrieved the tank. It could have
been pushed over the side into the canyon, but Service Company chose to
salvage it.

Another time one of our tanks hit a mine, and the results were grim. The tank
commander, an officer, became a mental case and was sent back to the States.
Previously he had been one of a small group who shot and killed some enemy
prisoners. The happening, terrible in itself, actually endangered everyone in
his division -- perhaps in the entire Seventh Army -- for if the Germans learned
of the incident and could identify the killer's unit, they would mete out similar
treatment to anyone they captured. (As noted previously, we removed our
division shoulder patches before embarking in New York, but the enemy had
other ways of determining what unit he faced.)

The weather turned cold in the mountains. I wore my combat suit all the time,
even while sleeping. A tanker combat suit had a heavy wool bib-overall, jacket,
and helmet. We stayed with our tanks day and night. Carl Phillips and I slept
on the floor of the turret; the other three members of the crew slept on-the
back deck over the engine compartment. They would crawl into their sleeping
bags and pull the canvas tarp over all of the bags. They stayed dry, and the
engine compartment was always warm for the first part of the night if the tank
had been run recently. We kept this sleeping arrangement throughout the time
we stayed together.

Mostly we ate individual C and K rations. Each C or K ration provided a meal
for one soldier. When we had more time for food preparation, we used five-inone
or ten-in-one rations. These rations provided meals for five or ten soldiers,
and they allowed much more variety. We had a small one-burner Coleman
stove. We always tried to scrounge a few onions from a local family. We
would slice the onions and throw them in with whatever we were cooking at
the time. The onions added a lot of flavor and made Army rations much more
palatable.

The first of many stops was in the mountain village of Cirey. I knocked on the
door of a house next to our tank just to be able to go indoors and get warmed
up. My German was much better then than it is now, so I could communicate
with the people who lived there. They had some potatoes on the stove and
offered us some. We accepted and gave them several packages of cigarettes in
return. Cigarettes, sugar, and coffee were in great demand and a common
means of barter.

We finally got through the mountains and out onto the broad Alsatian plain. In
Obernai I went into a bakery and bought some pumpernickel. We had no local
currency, so I don't know what I used for money. Perhaps I traded with
cigarettes again. The coarse dark bread was a change from the field rations we
had been living on, and besides, it was very good pumpernickel. Some of our
crew had never eaten bread that heavy and crusty, so not everyone liked it.

We learned by experience, common sense, or having been told that church
steeples make very good observation posts for enemy artillery forward
observers. In Obernai, we fired on both the highest church steeple and the
tower of the town hall.
(Footnote 5: Both towers had been nicely restored by the time I saw
them again in 1985.

Some Obernai townspeople warned the Reconnaissance Squadron of the 94th
Cavalry Battalion that there were Germans in Goxwiller, a town directly in
our line of march. The Germans had built a roadblock at the edge of Goxwiller
and covered it with machine gun emplacements. A platoon of tanks from
A Company blew up the roadblock and the machine guns.
(Footnote 6: My friend Harvey Sabinson, who was in the 94th Cavalry,
was not in the area at the time.

Our platoon, the
Assault Gun Platoon, was about a block behind the point, i.e. the lead vehicle.
The point can be any vehicle -- tank, half-track, armored car, Jeep, whatever. For some,
including me, riding point created almost unbearable tension that produced cold sweaty palms
as nothing else can. The apprehension was worse than the fighting itself. You and your crew
were the most exposed and vulnerable people in your world. Whenever and wherever the
enemy decided to attack, you would be the first in line to meet his charge. He might be lying
in wait in any woods, over any bridge, around any turn, behind any building. If you were
lucky, you might get a warning -- a spit of flame from a dug-in gun replacement -- and you
might get away and not be killed. Or you could be lucky and never know what hit you. But
always you waited!

The column proceeded toward Gertwiller, the next town, but it was stopped by
another roadblock about a quarter mile from the town's edge. The 76mm guns
of the line company tanks could not remove the roadblock, and the tanks were
under heavy mortar and machine gun fire. Our AG Platoon had 105mm
cannons, so we were called upon to do the job. We were also under heavy fire,
but because of our gunner's expert marksmanship and our commander's
coolness under fire, we managed to remove the roadblock.

Following that short action, Lieutenant John R. Martin, our platoon leader, got
into our tank; his being in the turret made it extremely crowded. Sergeant
John Donges, the commander of our tank, was a short stocky man, who in spite
of his ample girth managed to crouch behind Carl's seat. Having finished the
job of blowing up the roadblock, we proceeded with the lead vehicles into
Gertwiller. Had it not been for our blowing up the Gertwiller roadblock,
I would likely not have been involved in the action that followed.
(Footnote 8: In June, 1997, I received a letter from Frederic Bossert in response to an article I wrote for
the Liberator, the 14th Armored Division's newspaper. Mr. Bossert lives in Canada now, but
during the War he lived in Barr, a neighboring town to Gertwiller. He was fourteen years old
in 1944. He recalled that a tank commanded by Sergeant Howard Knapp of the 48th Tank
Battalion, 14th Armored Division burned in front of his parents' house. Mr. Bossert wanted to
know more about the action in the area around his home town. I have been in
correspondence with him since our initial contact.

Our tank had been moved from a position of relative safety into place with the
first tanks in the column. We had 'buttoned up,' i.e. closed the hatches used
for getting into and out of the tank. (We did not always secure the hatches. If
a tank were hit by an artillery shell or if it detonated a land-mine, the pressure
change inside the tank could well burst eardrums and/or cause concussions.

Closed but unsecured hatches acted like escape valves: the hatches would fly
open violently if the tank were hit. A small port about eight inches by eight
inches by the loader's place can be opened and fixed in an open position; the
port is intended to be used for disposal of used shell-casings, called brass.
Because there was no periscope on the loader's (my) side of the turret (note: later
models of the M-4 tank DID have a loader's periscope).

I opened the port and took up a viewing position. We were moving slowly
enough for any German infantryman to fire into the open port or, if he were
daring enough, to rush the tank and jam a hand grenade through the opening.

I did not think of those possibilities, and I was lucky that nothing happened.
We could not get through Gertwiller because the Germans has blown the main
bridge that made the town accessible. The Burgermeister (i.e., mayor) directed our
column to an alternate route, which turned out to be a trap. By the time we
had negotiated the narrow streets to the other side of town, it was getting dark.
Suddenly a camouflaged 88mm anti-tank gun knocked out our lead tank.
Lieutenant Jesse Tomey was the tank commander, and I witnessed his trying
to escape the burning tank. As he emerged from the hatch, I thought I saw the
tracer bullets both enter and leave his body. Perhaps what I saw was a stream
of tracers passing behind the lieutenant, but the scene is one I shall never
forget! Lieut. Tomey and one other member of that tank crew were killed. The
second tank was also hit. Two of the crew suffered severe concussions. While
still under enemy fire, the other three members of the crew pulled the injured
men to safety. The third tank, too, was hit, but all of the crew scrambled to
safety.
(Footnote 11: The German 88 was, arguably, the most famous gun of the war. It was originally designed
as an anti-aircraft weapon, but the Germans soon learned that it was extremely effective as an
anti-tank and anti-personnel weapon as well.
(Footnote 12: Lt. Tomey was a well-educated, friendly American Indian, who had to live under the
cloud of prejudice. Indians were not allowed to buy liquor, and the only way he could obtain
any spirits was through his friends.

At the same time, we were maneuvering into a position to fire at the hidden
gun. From the sound of the gun and the direction of the tracer bullets, we had
some idea of the gun's whereabouts. The German 88 (and later our 76mm and
90mm) had a muzzle brake, which partially hid the flash when the gun was
fired. Because of the muzzle brake, we could not determine the gun's position
visibly, so we had to rely on sound and guessing. The 88 was in front of us,
and the flooded street was behind us. We received no radio-transmitted
instructions from any level of command above us, so Sgt. Donges chose to stay
and fight. An AG tank carried high explosive rounds, anti-tank rounds, and
smoke rounds. We had already used some 105mm ammo to reduce the
roadblock that afternoon, so there were about fifty rounds remaining when Sgt.
Donges said Fire everything! I was the loader, and I had my work cut out for
me. I threw rounds into the gun breech so fast that my arms ached. The hot
brass was piling up at my feet, but I could not stop to throw it out the port.
The gun barrel got very hot, but it continued to fire.
After we had exhausted our ammunition, the 88 and the machine guns were
silent. We speculated that our fire put the 88 out of action early in our
barrage. If it had not, we would have taken return fire -- but we received
none. During the firing, I wondered when our tank would be hit. The
prospect of having our tank burst into flames was horrible to contemplate, but
we were too busy to dwell on the possibility very much.

When our
ammunition was expended, Eddie backed the tank to the edge of the flooded
street. It was a difficult maneuver and John had to guide him. I crawled out of
the tank and took up a position on the back deck, where I manned the
50-caliber machine gun. My job was to watch the darkened windows on both
sides of the street. If there were any sign of Germans, I was to use the
50-caliber gun immediately.

All these years later I question the wisdom of
such a tactic. It would have been easy for snipers to kill John and me before
I could use the machine gun. I was fortunate that the Germans in the houses
along that street chose not to reveal their positions just then. The town became
deathly quiet, and I did not fire a shot.
When Eddie stopped the tank, 'everyone got out, each taking his personal effects
with him. I untied the tarp covering the sleeping bags on the tank's back deck
and kicked the bags onto the ground; each of the crew then grabbed his bag.
While under enemy fire, the engineers had thrown up a treadway foot-bridge
across the stream, and we hurried to use it. I went back to the tank to render
the radio inoperative. (We were certain that the Germans would take our tank,
and we did not want them to be able to listen to our radio messages.) The trip
was necessary, and I did my job quickly.

George Johnson, our bow gunner, also
returned to the tank -- but for a more prosaic reason. He wanted to fetch his
football! When I asked him later just why he had gone back at such great risk
to himself, he replied that the War had to end sometime and he wanted his
football for that day. Both George and I got back across the bridge and sought
a place under cover. We found the tavern that the battalion commander was
using for his Command Post. There were quite a few of us in the taproom.
A fire was burning in the fireplace, and we warmed ourselves and prepared to
sweat out the night.

Our action of the previous night provided cover for the medics to evacuate the
dead and wounded from the tanks that were hit. Not only did we provide
cover, but we also silenced the machine gun and the 88. My riding the outside
of the tank ready to fire the 50-caliber machine gun further helped the medics
get the wounded out. (I do not actually know that the threat of machine gun
fire intimidated the Germans in the buildings along our path, but something
kept them from firing at the medics. Perhaps they realized that the medics
were evacuating wounded and honored the Geneva Convention, which allows
immunity of wounded combatants -- but I doubt it!)

For our actions, our entire crew was recommended for the Bronze Star.
Nothing came of the recommendation immediately, but the medics and the guys
in the A Company Platoon who were helped did not forget us.

The night in the tavern was not without incident. A big rangy first sergeant
from the B-62 came in, muttering to himself. He informed the assembled
company that a German sniper had fired at him and caused him to step into
a puddle. He slowly took off his boots and socks, dried them by the open fire,
and allowed that as soon as his feet were dry he was going to go out and get the
SOB that made him get wet feet. After he had gone outside, we heard just one
shot. The sergeant came back in and said quietly, "Got the bastard!"
I wondered if he really did.

Sometime around midnight I lay down on a tavern table and went to sleep.
Early the next morning, the Germans opened a counter-attack. Enemy artillery
and rifle fire increased, and our tavern no longer felt secure. The orders came
to withdraw. Just how we were to do that was not told us at that point. We
came to learn that the order implied Every man for himselfl The Germans
seemed to be everywhere, and there was a lot of activity in the street outside of
the tavern. Our battalion tanks were covering the infantry as the soldiers
attempted to get out of town on foot. I should have jumped onto a passing tank
and tried to get out the same way, but instead I chose to take my chances and
wait until later when there would be daylight. I went back to sleep on the
tavern table.

When I awoke, it was already light, and I realized that I had
probably made a wrong decision. The battalion commander was leaving with
his driver. His Jeep was at the tavern door, and the two of them were going to
make a run for it. George and I threw our sleeping bags and musette bags into
the back of their Jeep. It was so full of stuff that there was no room for any
passengers. They made it out of town just fine.

After they left, only George and I remained in the tavern. I do not know how or
when the other members of our crew -- John, Carl, and Eddie -- got away.
There was a garden wall about eight feet high on the other side of street. We
thought we would be safer on the other side of the wall. I am not sure why
we thought that: there was fighting going on all through the town, and the
Germans were as likely to be there as anywhere else.

George and I decided
that I would make a dash for the wall while George covered me. Then I was to
cover him while he tried to cross the street. All went well at first, but when
George made his dash, halfway through his crossing the cartridge clip fell out
of his submachine gun. When he realized that his ammunition clip had
dropped out of his gun, he turned around to retrieve it! First his football and
then an ammunition clip! George would not leave anything behind! I shouted
to him to forget it, but his instinct took over and he picked up his clip. All the
while the Germans were spraying the street with machine-gun fire, and I was
returning their fire with my weapon.

George made it across the street, and we
vaulted the wall one at a time. The other side offered no better protection,
unfortunately: there were Germans in the all the houses surrounding the
courtyard.

George and I then parted company. I do not know where George went, but he
disappeared and I was on my own. I managed to get back to the main street
through an alley. Once on the street, I dodged from one doorway to the next.
At the entrance to one of the houses, a German hit me with his rifle butt. He
was probably out of ammunition so used his rifle as a club. I went down, and
someone else shot the German. I was stunned but got up and continued on my
way.

My head hurt! I began to run. I had to keep watching for snipers in
second-story windows on both sides of the street. Some of them were dimly
visible in the recesses of the upstairs rooms. After more running and dodging,
I caught up with a truck moving so slowly that I could run along side it. It
protected me from the left, so I had only to watch for snipers on my right.
I noted that no one else used the truck as a shield, and I remember thinking
how strange it was that I should be alone. Was I the only one smart enough to
use the truck for protection? When I reached the relative safety of the town's
outskirts, I hurried forward to the cab; I wanted to thank the driver for the
favor he did not know he had rendered. He shouted to me, "Move away from
my truck! It's loaded with high explosives! Any stray bullet could blow us
both to Kingdom Come!" I got out of the way, but I still thanked him.

Maj. Shedd from Battalion Headquarters was the first familiar face I saw. He
wanted to know everything that I could tell him about what was going on in
Gertwiller. What I knew was limited to my own experience, so I was not much
help to him. The next person I met was Eugene 'Pancho' Nieri. He was
a half-track driver who had spent the night in his vehicle with the radio on.
He was trying to find out where his buddies were and smoked two packs of
cigarettes in the process. I thought he was going to kiss me.
(Footnote 13: Ruth and I looked up Pancho while on our honeymoon in 1948. He lived in Palo Alto,
California, where he ran a dry-cleaning establishment. I have tried to find him on more
recent visits to Palo Alto but without success.

Eventually all the members of our tank crew were accounted for, and we got
back together. In the afternoon someone from our field kitchen brought us
cold turkey sandwiches, some cranberry relish, pumpkin pie, and coffee. We
missed Thanksgiving dinner, but the cooks took care of their own in fine style.
That night we slept in a farmer's shed, and the next morning we had a hot
breakfast, the first meal served from the field kitchen in a long time.
The second day of fighting in Gertwiller was less fierce than the first, and by
late morning our forces had the situation well in hand. The town was not fully
cleared of Germans, but barring a concentrated counterattack we were
confident we could go back into the town to recover our tank -- if it were still
parked where we left it.

Of course it was not! The Germans had driven it away with their other
vehicles. After that I always wondered whether enemy fire might be coming
from our old tank! After checking to see if our tank were still in Gertwiller, we
set out to pick up another tank from a supply depot somewhere in the rear.
The first night of our trip to the depot, we found ourselves in a mountain town
some miles behind the front. It was in a canyon, and our billet for the night
was a house on the side of one of the canyon walls. Sound carried very well,
and we could hear firing all night. It seemed to be very close, so we did not get
much sleep. Several months later the night sounds would not have bothered
us, but we were all new to combat and our nerves were still on edge from the
events in Gertwiller. We had no tank, so we posted no guard and all went to
bed.

That was a mistake that could have been disastrous because there were so
many Germans in the area. After that, from 8:00 P.M. until 6:00 A.M. -- 2000
hours until 0600 hours in Army talk -- we kept one person standing guard at
the tank. Each watch lasted two hours. I liked least the 2:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M.
shift, best the one from eight until ten in the evening. We usually drew straws
for the order of standing watch.

We picked up our new tank at the supply depot and were told where to go to
rejoin the battalion. Each of us had lost some personal gear, which we were
able to replace from our company supply. Fortunately, most of our belongings
were kept in personal duffel bags which were stored with Battalion Trains; thus
our things remained untouched.

The trip back to our company was uneventful. We were alone for the entire
time. There were few Americans on the roads, and we did not trust the local
populace. We always ate very well: as mealtime approached, we would look for
an American Army field kitchen. No matter what the unit, the cooks always fed
itinerant Gls.

It took only a few days to get back, and we did have to spend at least one night
completely isolated. We didn't know whether or not there might be Germans
around, so we had to be very cautious. Sgt. Donges chose a barn in which to
stay the first night. There were no other buildings around it. We took the tank
right inside the barn and slept in the hay on the second floor. We settled down
with the usual guard assignments. The hay was warm and soft, and I was
completely dry. Getting up for my two hours of guard duty was hard, but I had
a good shift that night. The choice of an isolated building in the middle of an
open field was actually a poor one. Any local civilians or German soldiers
could surely see us. One incendiary artillery round into the barn would have
set it ablaze. Our guardian angels worked hard that night.

We rejoined our platoon and company at St. Pierre on December 2 or 3. The
division had been placed in Corps Reserve but was alerted to be ready to move
on a half-hour notice. We welcomed the hot meals: for almost two weeks many
of the troops had eaten more field rations than kitchen-prepared food.
From St. Pierre the battalion moved north to Riedheim, a village about twenty
miles northwest of Strasbourg. There we had a few days' respite. Our tank was
brand new, so it needed little day-to-day maintenance. The other tank crews in
the platoon had to do some work on their vehicles, and we pitched in to help
wherever we could. Our Service Company welded racks onto the sides of the
tanks to hold sand bags. The bags added a measure of protection against
the dreaded German 88, but their added weight reduced the top speed.
Sometime later, Gen. Patton dressed down a tank commander for using sand
bags. In forceful and colorful language, he ordered the sand bags off because
they reduced a tank's speed and maneuverability and gave the impression of
cowardice. I do not know how the Germans could capitalize on sand bags, but
Patton thought they were sending the wrong message. Our thought was Better
a slow live coward than a fast dead hero! The bags came off.

We had to sleep in the open or in tanks during our first weeks in combat, and
we soon learned that our sleeping bags were not warm enough to keep us
comfortable. We improved them by stuffing them with German Army blankets.
Although they were not wool, they added warmth.  Synthetics such as dacron, which is frequently used to fill sleeping bags now, were not yet
developed in 1944.

We came across a lot of
abandoned German equipment, so finding extra blankets was not difficult.
I was always reluctant to use them because of what might happen if I were
captured and had German equipment among my personal effects. I tried to get
another US Army blanket from supply but was told that I had all the equipment
that I was entitled to. Eventually I solved the problem by taking some Army
blankets from a burned-out American tank. (Their owners had been killed.)
I gave my German blankets to a farmer, who was very happy to have them.
Whenever we stopped for the night in a village, we sought indoor lodging
unless we thought we would be safer close to our tank. The usual approach
was to find a likely looking house, knock, and ask Haben Sie ein Zimmer fur
fumpf Soldaten? (Have you a room for five soldiers?). We were never turned
away. Put yourself in the place of an Alsatian villager. Would you refuse five
armed foreigners knocking at your door?

The homes were very much the same -- a half-timbered, functional farm house
and farm buildings surrounding a barnyard. The barnyard had a manure pile,
which would be used for fertilizer the following spring. We often noted that if
we had to be in rural Alsace at all, we were glad our time came in the winter.

One of the buildings usually contained a potato distillery. At one of our village
stops, I witnessed a farmer test his Schnapps. He drained about a half a cup
from the spigot at the bottom of the still and poured it over the domed top.
Then he touched a lighted match to the dome. If the liquid burned, he
considered the batch finished. I think alcohol burns at about 100 proof. We
had ample opportunity to test the strength of home-made Alsatian Schnapps.

Because our battalion was in the same place for a few days, we had hot meals.
The mess kitchen was in the back of a truck, and another truck carried the
mess sergeant and the cooks. Our kitchen staff was very good, and the meals
they served during our brief stay in Riedheim were most welcome. The cooks
did some interesting things apart from preparing food -- like distilling their
own spirits. They tried grapefruit juice, but it did not work. After using
several kinds of dried fruit, they finally got something to ferment: their batch of
raisin jack really took off!' I never got to taste it; it was consumed before I had
a chance.

Riedhiem was typical of the villages in Alsace, but the house in which we were
billeted had a special distinction. The farmer owned a bull for breeding. The
first morning we were there, several neighboring farmers brought their cows
to be serviced. The word got out, and soon the breeding stall had Gls lining
the fence to watch the procedure. I am not sure what vicarious sex kick they
(we -- for I was there, too!) got out of watching, but it was a diversion.
During the few days of respite from the fighting, we were all given Post
Exchange rations. Each daily ration contained a pack of cigarettes, a small
Hershey bar, and a package of gum. PX rations were extra and available only
about once a month. The PX truck stopped at each unit, and we could buy
a certain number of cans of beer or pop -- probably a six-pack -- and other
things, but the beer and soft drinks were always the favorites.

An Army dentist visited our outfit as part of his regular rounds. I had a small
cavity and elected to have him fill it. The equipment was primitive. The chair
was a simple metal one. The drill was run by a maze of wires and pulleys
powered by a foot treadle, much the way my mother's sewing machine was
operated. An assistant, the dentist's driver, manned the treadle. The speed of
the drill depended on how fast he ran it. He must have been tired or he was
having a bad day when I was in the chair because he did not make the drill go
very fast. My cavity was small, so the dentist decided not to use Novocain.
A slow drill hurts.

On December 9, the battalion was put on forty-five minute alert. We knew
that we were going on the attack soon, and we became ever more grim and
sober. Our stay at Riedheim was about to end, and we were going into
engagements that later became known as the Battle of the Lower Vosges
Mountains.

Chapter VII: Into Germany -- and Back

In December, 1944, the 14th Armored Division entered Germany for the first
time. Gls in the line knew nothing about grand strategy or even local tactics, so
we were unaware of our goal from one attack to the next. We left the relative
comfort of Riedheim and once again had to live in the open or in the tanks.
The immediate objective for our battalion was Wissembourg, a beautiful city on
the German-French border.

Early in the month, the division was deployed along a southeast-northwest line,
the southeastern end of which began just north and west of Strasbourg. The
line was about eighty miles long, much too long a front for one division to
cover. Those units of the division that were to move toward the German
frontier had to regroup for the attack to the northeast. The division moved in
several parallel columns. Our battalion was divided into two columns. Our
tank went with the eastern column. The western column supposedly had the
more difficult route, but both columns encountered stiff enemy resistance. Our
eastern group was to advance to the German border along the Lauter River
because Wissembourg is on the Lauter.

We moved out on December 13. Our tank was far back in the column. The
light tank platoon of Lieutenant Paul M. 'Smiley' Klinefelter was the first unit
in the line of march. 'Smiley' himself rode the point vehicle. Light tanks are
smaller and have thinner skin (armor) than the M-4 Sherman medium tanks,
but they have greater maneuverability and speed than the mediums -- not
necessarily a comforting thought when riding the point. The weather was gray
and overcast. We moved through Hagenau and then the Hagenau Forest. The
woods were dark and forbidding, and mist hung in the trees. We expected to
draw some 88mm fire while going through the woods, but the Germans did not
shoot. We suspected a trap.

The division had been in France only a few months, but we had all learned to
be cautious. Those of us in the tanks had our own special fears. German tanks
or dug-in anti-tank pieces were always a fearsome threat to us, especially when
we had to move through dense cover. Any time of low visibility, the German
infantryman was as threatening as a Panzer. It seemed strange that a single
foot soldier armed with a Panzerfaust or Molotov cocktail could create so much
havoc for our big tanks. Five trained and alert American soldiers -- each with
his own weapon, moving in a 32-ton armored vehicle powered by
a 500-horsepower engine capable of driving it to speeds up to fifty-five miles
an hour, armed with a cannon and three machine guns -- should have been
more than a match for a single enemy soldier. But such was not always the
case! Obviously we had great respect for the German infantry!
(Footnote 1: A Panzerfaust was the German version of our bazooka. Its charge burned its way through
thick armor and then exploded inside of its target, presumably a tank.

A Molotov cocktail was
a simple bottle of gasoline with a rag wick. The wick was lighted and the whole thing thrown
onto the target. When the bottle broke, releasing the gasoline, the 'cocktail' acted like an
incendiary bomb. Germans frequently tossed Molotov cocktails on the rear deck of a tank so
that the gasoline would run down into the engine compartment and blow up the whole
engine.

We arrived in Surbourg without incident, and the next day we went through
the neighboring town of Soultz, where we first saw Maginot Line
fortifications.
(Footnote 2: Ruth and I stopped at the same Maginot Line fortification in 1985. There a North Atlantic
Treaty Organization officer acted as our guide. He had served in the German Army during the
War, and when captured by the American forces, he was sent to a prison camp in North
Carolina.

When I saw the gun emplacements, I expected a massive
artillery bombardment, but there was none. Our division, however, was
engaged in fierce fighting not long after leaving the Maginot Line. Even then,
our Assault Gun Platoon was used as artillery, so we were not in direct contact
with the enemy. From Soultz we moved northeast toward Seebach. On the
way, our lead tank encountered a blown bridge. The engineers quickly put up
a temporary bridge, and we were back on track very soon. We spent the night
near a railroad station, which served as a Battalion Command Post.

The next
day we proceeded through Seebach. Lieut. Klinefelter's tank was hit while
rounding a curve approaching a railroad bridge. The tank burst into flames,
and almost immediately the second tank was hit. Sergeant Bill Winslow of our
Assault Gun Platoon was called upon to fire where he had seen flashes and
where he thought the 88 might be.
(Footnote 3:  My friend Dick Keskey was a crew member in the Winslow tank. He later told me he
remembered our action in Gertwiller because we fired at noises, not at targets we could
actually see.

In response to the Winslow tank's barrage, we came under heavy artillery and mortar fire
(known as counter-battery).  The fire was coming from the
general direction of Wissembourg. While all this was going on, Sergeant
Preston Rensch of the battalion medical detachment evacuated the wounded
from the burning light tanks. He did this in broad daylight and under enemy
fire. I did not witness the rescue, but I was told that his was an act of real
bravery.

The western column, by now also given the mission of taking
Wissembourg, moved to the outskirts of the town. There the lead tank was
stopped because of a road block. The tank commander ordered his gunner to
destroy it with the tank's big gun. After firing a few rounds into the roadblock,
the tank commander went forward on foot to examine the results of his crew's
efforts. To his amazement and chagrin, there stood our battalion S-2 officer
and his driver. They had rushed past the point of the eastern column and
entered the city before anyone else. They were credited with being the first
14th Armored Division men into the city -- but in a Jeep!

When our platoon reached Wissembourg, we parked our tank next to German
Army barracks, where we learned something of German Army practices
regarding Venereal Disease prevention. A prisoner told us that the building
next door to the barracks was occupied by women especially recruited to serve
the German soldiers. Upon entering the 'house,' a soldier surrendered his dog
tags and could not retrieve them until he gave evidence of having been to the
dispensary for a prophylactic treatment. Supposedly, the procedure controlled
VD.

We had to stay in Wissembourg while a bridge was repaired and some
roadblocks removed, so Carl and I took a walk. Not too smart! Later we
learned that the town had not been completely cleared of Germans. A sniper
could have shot us while we were acting like tourists.
(Footnote 5: Ruth and I had a delicious lunch in the restaurant of that inn in 1985. The courtyard had
not changed when we passed through Wissembourg again in 1995.

One inn built around
a courtyard particularly impressed me.
Our entry into Wissembourg took place on December 16, the day the Germans
attacked in force in the Ardennes. The date marks the beginning of the Battle
of the Bulge, which would have serious consequences for us in Alsace. The
Third Army commanded by Gen. Patton was sent to relieve the divisions
encircled in Belgium and Luxembourg, so our forces were spread very thin over
a long front.

The battalion's next objective was in Germany. We were to cross the Lauter
River, but the main bridge was blown. A by-pass route took us east toward
Schweighofen, Germany. When we crossed the Lauter, most of us entered
Germany proper for the first time.

We met resistance in late afternoon, and the AG Platoon immediately went into
action. We fired many rounds of ammunition in an effort to knock out the
German artillery positions.  Darkness falls early in December, so the column
"closed" for the night. Similar to circling the wagons, the term "to close" means to shut down.

Sentries were instructed to be extra alert and vigilant:
we were in Germany, and the enemy had the advantage of being on familiar
ground. German patrols might easily infiltrate our lines. Nothing happened.
Fighting resumed the next day, and the town was cleared of the enemy before
noon. The battalion moved on towards Kapsweyer, the next town. We could
not enter it immediately: the division had orders to withdraw because the 12th
Tactical Air Force had a bombing mission in the area. Somehow this
information did not reach all of the troops, and I was caught in the open when
the planes started bombing. I saw the B-26 bombers7 clearly and assumed that
their targets were farther east in the Siegfried Line. I stood out there and
watched with awe and fascination. I even waved, knowing full well the
bomber crews could not see me. But I felt good! Then I noticed: they were
bombing the town I was in! I thought to myself, "Either the bombardiers have
done a poor job, or they were assigned the wrong town!" I was standing right
in the middle of their target!

I headed for a German pillbox, hoping, of course,
that there were no Germans in it. There were none! I dove in and stayed there
until the bombing mission was over. The time I spent in the pillbox seemed an
eternity, but actually it was only a few minutes. To be on the receiving end of
an American bombing mission is a noisy and scary experience. The planes
missed my pillbox, so I was okay -- if a little shaken!
(Footnote 7: The B-26 airplane was a 'hot plane.' It was very fast but tricky to fly. It was used
extensively in support of ground troops in Normandy. There it earned the sobriquet The
Widow Maker. It was also called The Baltimore Whore because it had no visible means of
support. I met a B-26 bomber crew member in the Samena spa. He confirmed the plane's
reputation. He was in the 9th Tactical Air Force, so he could not have been on the Kapsweyer-Steinfeld
mission.
(Continue Footnote:
According to a newscast on September 29, 1995, the last B-26 crashed.

After that debacle we entered Kapsweyer. We encountered some fighting to get
into the town, but not much. In Kapsweyer we caught our first glimpse of the
vaunted Seigfried Line. I did not see the pillboxes and dragon's teeth right
away because the ground wasn't high enough, but we could see the whole front
line from the second floor of the Battalion Command Post. We would see much
more soon enough! Lieut. Martin, our platoon leader, was a gung ho type, and
he immediately placed the AG Platoon right out in the open so that we could
fire directly onto the pillboxes and casements. He wanted to see what effect
Anti-Tank and High-Explosive shells (called AT and HE shells, respectively) had
on pillboxes. Every time that we fired we received direct fire in return.

In
direct firing the gunner actually sees his target, as in rifle fire. The Germans
were looking right down our throats. We must have had a lot of luck or a
guardian angel protection that day, for not a single tank in the platoon was hit.
The battalion also had support from the 501st Field Artillery. The artillery
forward observers took up positions in a church steeple, and the steeple was
almost immediately fired upon by the Germans. The observers escaped
unharmed. As night fell, the enemy artillery and mortar fire increased. The
town was being demolished around us.

A terrible thing happened late on the afternoon of our first day in Kapsweyer.
Colonel Ernest C. Watson, Lieutenant Hilliard F. Kirby, and some members of
the Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon were caught in the open near the
Battalion Command Post. An artillery shell grazed the front brim of Lieut.
Kirby's steel helmet and blinded him for life. No one else in the group was
even touched.
(Footnote 8: I read of Lieut. Kirby's return to civilian life in the Liberator. 
 
I remember an incident that had nothing to do with the battle going on all
around us. Kapsweyer was a small village, and most of the houses and public
buildings had no indoor plumbing. The 'facility' for the house that our tank
crew was using as a billet and place to get out of the cold had a primitive
outhouse. Upon opening the door of the privy, we found a dead German
occupying the seat. Attaching an explosive device to a body was one means of
setting a booby-trap, and we had been warned about such procedures in
training films. We left the body alone and later saw the outhouse blown up by
a mortar shell. A dead German may have saved someone's life, perhaps mine.

Sometime after midnight a patrol went out to examine the dragon's teeth
because the engineer platoon needed information. The men found seven rows
of teeth. At 2:00 A.M. the engineers moved out to blow a path through the
dragon's teeth. They carried 700 pounds of dynamite. As they reached the last
row, they were pinned down by sniper fire and forced to withdraw. They
returned with the dynamite and a captured German sentry. I happened to be
on guard at our tank when the engineers came back, and because our tank was
at the edge of town, I was the first person to see the returning patrol. At first
I thought the men were Germans, but they knew the password for the night
and I held my fire. They frightened me, though.
(Footnote 9: I met one John Copes on our 1985 trip. When I told him that I was the first person to make
contact with the returning patrol, he immediately asked if I was the one that had taken his
watch. He was wounded on a patrol into Steinfeld during the last week of March, 1945, and
was helped back by buddies. The first person he saw was a medic who relieved him of his
watch. I assured him that I was referring to a different incident and that I did not take
his watch.

The next morning we
resumed firing at emplacements in the Siegfried Line. Our artillery barrage
was joined by big guns, the 155mm rifles and 8-inch howitzers from Corps
Artillery. The return fire was immediate. The roar of outgoing shells
accompanied by the explosions of incoming shells made a horrible din.
Fighting continued throughout that day and into the night. The following day
the battalion was relieved by the 48th Tank Battalion. Soon after that, all
elements of the 14th were pulled back to straighten the lines, for we had gone
too far and exposed ourselves to attack on our flanks. Perhaps if Gen. Patton's
Third Army had not been moved north to relieve the troops at Bastogne, we
could have continued our offensive deeper into Germany.

The withdrawal did not take long. The Battalion Command Post and
Headquarters Company including the AG Platoon were assigned to the village
of Schleithal. Other companies were in two neighboring towns. All the towns
were near the German border.

Upon arrival at our assigned area, we were told by some departing Gls that the
Germans had infiltrated the lines and had killed some American troops with
bayonets while they slept. We did not take the rumor too seriously but felt
apprehensive for a while, nonetheless. The guards were especially alert that
first night.

The battalion then enjoyed a few days' rest. During that time I cleaned some of
my woolen clothes with gasoline. Our crew had an extra Jerri-can, which was a five-callon container, of gas
delivered when Service Company dropped off our fuel for the tank. My clothes
did not smell much after hanging on a line for several hours.
I am almost embarrassed to report the incident of cleaning my clothes with gasoline
because most civilians could purchase no more than four gallons of gasoline a week.

The time of our respite came during the season of Advent. Division Chaplain
Hollister conducted services several times to accommodate everyone. His driver
played the portable organ. We sang Christmas songs, and there were some wet
cheeks under our tin hats!

We were going from the offensive to the defensive, but we did not know that.
Gen. Eisenhower never consulted us on the 'big picture' strategy.
News trickling in told us that all was not going well with the First Army in the
Ardennes. The Germans under Field Marshall Rudolf Gerd von Rundstedt were
attempting a massive incursion through Belgium, Luxembourg, and into France,
and this potential thrust by the German lines gave the action which followed
the name Battle of the Bulge. Gen. Patton's Third Army went north into
Belgium, and the Seventh Army was left to defend a very long front. At the
same time, a large enemy force was being assembled on the west bank of
the Rhine, opposite the First French Army. If the Germans were successful in
the Bulge and if they broke through the French, the Seventh Army would be
trapped. The battalion wandered around northeastern Alsace for several days,
always reinforcing weak spots in the line. Nothing made much sense to the
front line troops. We knew just enough of the strategic situation to be uneasy.
We had only occasional direct contact with the enemy, but we engaged in many
indirect fire missions in which we used tanks as artillery. Security was
especially tight.

At Christmastime we found ourselves in Rittershoffen,
a village of less than a thousand people. Rittershoffen was to become very
important to me -- several times that winter and again in 1985 and 1995.
Our first billet in Rittershoffen was the on the second floor of a house close to
the Evangelische (Lutheran) church. I do not remember the family who lived
there, but the church was very important to us while we were with them.
Protestant services were held several times. One afternoon in the churchyard,
there was a retreat ceremony for presentation of awards to our battalion. There
was a little bitterness among some of the enlisted men, for the citations seemed
to go mostly to officers. Members of our tank crew half-expected to receive
commendation for our action at Gertwiller. The rancor did not last: one cannot
afford to let personal feelings get in the way of common sense when one is in
the front line.

The battalion command thought that the tanks were too close to one another
and the concentration of armor made an attractive target. German intelligence
may have been observing us. We were ordered to disperse. On Christmas Eve
our tank crew slept in the home of Berthe Holzmann. We followed the usual
procedure of knocking on the door of the house nearest to the tank's parking
place and asking for quarters for five soldiers. Berthe admitted us. She had
three children, two boys about twelve and ten years old and a little girl about
five. We had seen very few trees in the Alsatian homes and churches that
Advent season, but Berthe had a Christmas tree. She had little else with which
to celebrate Christmas, but her tree was decorated with ornaments and real
candles. We shared some Christmas goodies that we had received from home
and sang some German carols. I know that Berthe was uneasy, but I think
she enjoyed sharing Christmas with people who believed as she in the birth of
a Savior.
I did not remember either the boys' or Berthe's names, but I did recall
that the little girl's name was Annelies many years later when I needed to
know. (See Appendix E for the complete story.)
(Footnote 12: In 1985, Berthe told me she was especially afraid of George (of the retrieved football
incident). George was teddy-bear of a fellow who wouldn't hurt a flea -- but he was big and
dark, and he scared her.

On Christmas Day we moved our tank to another part of the town. In keeping
with our practice of sleeping near the tank, we moved to new quarters, though
I wished we could have stayed with the Holzmann family a while longer.
Christmas Day was quiet but tense. Seventh Army Headquarters reported that
enemy paratroops were landing in the area. We could look south across an
open field to where a dense forest might well conceal infantry and tanks. Many
of our fellows imagined all manner of enemy activity in the woods. Still
nothing happened, and our cooks prepared a turkey dinner with all the
trimmings. What they could do in a field kitchen was amazing!

The battalion remained in Rittershoffen until December 30. Chaplains
conducted both Protestant and Catholic services a few days after Christmas.
We did routine tank maintenance, washed our dirty clothes, bathed when we
could -- in general, we took care of the tank and personal housekeeping chores.
All the while we were on edge because we did not know our position relative to
the enemy's.

The Battle of the Bulge was essentially over. The skies cleared on Christmas
Day, and Allied bombers flew many missions in the Bulge sector. Still German
troops were being brought south, and we were in a constant state of readiness.
Our battalion finally moved west on December 30. We were to reinforce Task
Force Hudelson,. The task force, formed on December 21 and named for the
colonel who led it, was made up of elements of our division. Its mission was to
establish defensive positions in the lower Vosges mountain passes. The
departure of most of Patton's Third Army to the Bulge had left the passes
undefended, and thus our forces along the Rhine were vulnerable. Our
movement was yet one more complication in the cat-and-mouse game we were
playing with the enemy. The strategists must have been burning a lot of
midnight oil.

Early New Year's Eve, our crew was standing around a small fire drinking
coffee when 'Bed-Check Charlie' made one of his visits. 'Bed-Check Charlie'
was a German pilot who flew a small reconnaissance plane over the front lines
in an attempt to draw fire. Sometimes a GI would take a pot shot at Charlie just
for the heck of it. The chances of hitting him were slim; shooting was just
a way of relieving tension. I doubt the pilot ever saw much of any real interest.
Anyway, we quickly doused our fire and thought that Charlie would go away.
But he stayed longer than usual, so we became cautious and uneasy. The
Germans were up to something.

I went to church in the German Evangelische church New Year's Eve. I also
looked in on the Catholic services. (The two churches were across the street
from one another.) I was impressed with the fact that a little Alsatian village
had two such large churches. Neither church was heated that winter night.
The Lutherans sat on pews, but the Catholics stood throughout their worship.
The singing was better in the Lutheran service. I did not go alone; I think Carl
Phillips was my companion. We slept in an extremely nice house that night. It
must have belonged to a prosperous person. Our New Year's Day, turkey
dinner was a hurried affair because the battalion was on constant alert. After
dinner we moved to Uhrwiller, a village in one of the lower Vosges mountain
passes.

Operation Nordwind, the last great German offensive, began January 1, 1945.
Just after midnight, the Germans launched an assault on the American forces
manning the long east-west part of the front line. That line ran from the Rhine
River to a point 84 miles west. Task Force Hudelson held about 10 miles of the
front. The Germans' initial attack was swift and costly to the Americans,
especially to Hudelson. We were not officially part of the task force, but we
might as well have been. Our function was to plug holes in the line, block the
mountain passes, and help as much as we could as often as we could.

Our days in the villages of the lower Vosges Mountains were strange.
Sometimes we engaged in furious action. Other times everything was very
quiet.
In one of the villages we had time to clean and repair our equipment. We
parked our tank in the courtyard owned by one of the farmers of the village
and slept in his barn. The house had no bathroom, so I asked the farmer if
I might use his kitchen to take a sponge bath. He heated water on the kitchen
stove and gave me a basin.

Our Battalion Trains just happened to be in the
same village as our platoon, so I had access to my duffel bag and all my
personal effects. I used my own soap, towel, toothpaste, toothbrush, and
shaving gear, and I put on a complete set of clean clothes -- underwear, socks,
shirt, and pants. It felt so-o-o good to be clean! The other fellows in the crew
soon followed suit, and for a while ours was the cleanest tank crew in town!

That night we saw a movie in a barn. A generator operated by a gasoline
engine provided electricity. The generator, projector, and film came from
Special Services, but I never knew how they got them up to the front. The
movie was The Bridge of San Luis Rey from the book by Thornton Wilder. The
movie came out in 1944, so it was a recent release at the time. I remember
little about it except that I enjoyed it. Years later I read the book and liked it,
too.

On one clear day we saw a great number of US Air Force bombers fly overhead.
They were quite a sight, and we watched, waved, and cheered. The bombers
were heading for targets in Germany, so their proposed raid had nothing to do
with the ground tactics in Alsace. Even so, I felt good seeing American planes
in the air. Because of the bad weather in December, the troops in the Ardennes
did not have air support during the Battle of the Bulge. We did not want
a repeat of their situation!

Once I got into a little trouble with Lieut. Martin, my platoon leader. I was
standing guard between midnight and 2:00 A.M. Our tank was parked near
another tank, so I went over to it and talked to its guard. The night was cold
and clear, so sound traveled well. Lieut. Martin was out doing a routine check
around the town when he heard us. He immediately informed us that, had he
been a German, we would either be dead or prisoners. I took guard duty more
seriously after that.

Most of the news of strategic moves on our front came from Stars and Stripes,
the soldiers' newspaper. We learned a little from our officers, but usually they
did not know much more than the enlisted men. Somehow we learned that the
German offensive in the Ardennes, the Battle of the Bulge, had been contained.

Now the Germans, in Operation Nordwind, would attempt breaking through
the Wissembourg Gap. The towns of Hatten and Rittershoffen lay in their path.
(Footnote 13: Operation Nordwind began in the Bitche Sector, where the Germans attempted to probe the
Seventh Army front.

For about ten days, beginning on January 5, intelligence reported large
concentrations of armor and infantry near Rittershoffen and Hatten and the
neighboring towns of Buhl and Stundwiller. On January 10, our battalion
moved to an assembly area in the vicinity of Woerth. There we prepared for
the Battle of Hatten-Rittershoffen. We did not know what, but we knew that
something terrible was about to happen!
(Footnote 14: We had electricity in our Woerth billet, the first since we arrived in Alsace. The town had
maintained its power source throughout the fighting.


Chapter VIII: The Low Vosges Mountain Campaign, December, 1944 to January, 1945

This account is taken from two sources. One is an article by David Colley in the
January, 1995, issue of the Veterans of Foreign Wars magazine. The side-bar to that
article reads, "Hitler's final offensive on the Western Front in January, 1945,
devastated the French province of Alsace. Vet, the U.S. Seventh Army's desperate
battle there is among the least known of the European War." The other source is an
account of the actions of the U.S. Seventh Army under the command of Gen. Patch
from December 15, 1944, until January 25, 1945, as prepared at the Seventh Army
Headquarters at the request of the Army and Navy Journal.

In early December, 1944, the American Seventh Army broke through the
southern Vosges Mountains and faced the German border across the broad
Alsatian plain to the east and the lower Vosges Mountains to the north. The
Army's objective was to move into Germany. The way seemed clear.

American troops moved steadily north and northeast during the first part of the
month. On December 15, elements of the Seventh Army crossed into
Germany. On December 17, the 25th Tank Battalion of the 14th Armored
Division moved from Wissembourg in Alsace across the Lauter River into
German villages, where they came up against the Siegfried Line fortifications.
The incursion was one of the deepest penetrations into the Fatherland ever.

Shortly thereafter, the 14th AD troops were ordered to withdraw for tactical
reasons. Intelligence reports, air reconnaissance, and infantry patrols all
indicated that the Seventh Army would be hit hard in late December. All along
the frozen, snowbound front in northeastern France, troops of Gen. Patch's
Seventh Army braced for an attack.

The Battle of the Bulge began on December 16. The Germans needed
a diversion to relieve pressure on their divisions in the Ardennes, where the
US First Army had regained its balance and was beginning to push them back.
The US Third Army under Gen. Patton relinquished ground to the adjacent
Seventh Army as the Third dispatched divisions to the Bulge, thus leaving
Patch's units stretched perilously thin.

The geography of the front rendered the Seventh Army vulnerable. The front
line formed a V-shaped salient, which was dubbed the Lauterbourg Bulge. Its
northern edge stretched more than 84 miles from west to east, from a point
near Saarbrucken to Lauterbourg, a town near the Rhine River and the
German border. The front then ran south along the Rhine for 42 miles to
a point south of Strasbourg.

Hitler considered the Lauterbourg Bulge a ripe fruit waiting to be plucked, so
he ordered his generals to concentrate on the Alsatian sector of his Western
Front. The meeting of Hitler and his generals took place on December 28 in
a castle east of the Rhine. There they devised a plan, which they called
Operation Nordwind. It was to be put into force on January 1. Marshal von
Runstedt was to lead the German High Command West.

Operation Nordwind began just after midnight on New Year's Day, 1945, when
two corps from the German First Army attacked southward in the lower Vosges
Mountains. Their objective was to reach the Saverne Gap and split the US XV
and VI Corps, thus isolating the VI Corps on the Alsatian plain with its back to
the Rhine. The VI Corps included the 14th AD, the only armored division in the
eastern sector.

The weather was bitterly cold in the Vosges Mountains that January. Snow
was knee-deep, and water froze in canteens. Infantrymen could not dig
foxholes . because the ground was frozen. Tank and half-track drivers had
difficulty keeping their vehicles on the roads because they were sheets of ice.

Task Force Harris, one of the several hastily assembled commands, met the
initial attack by the Germa.n XIII Corps. The Germans had not counted on
the determination of the American troops, and their attack faltered.

The German LXXXIX Corps from Bitche fared better. The Germans surprised
the Americans in Task Force Hudelson. The fight between the German
LXXXIX Corps and the American Task Force lasted three weeks. Other
elements of the 14th AD, including the 25th Tank Battalion, became involved
later.
(Footnote 1: The task force was made up of elements of the 117th Cavalry Squadron, the 94th Cavalry
Squadron, and the 62nd Armored Infantry Battalion. The last two units were from the 14th AD.


The 100th Infantry Division and two recently assembled task forces assisted
Task Force Hudelson in turning back the German attack. The fighting was
furious, and the outcome was in doubt for three or four days. Had the
Germans broken out behind the VI Corps, the corps would have been trapped.

By January 5, the German attacks of Operation Nordwind began to wane.

But these assaults were only the first in a series launched by the Germans in
Alsace. Most of the attacks were against the Seventh Army. The French First
Army under General Jean de Lattre de Tassigney was engaged farther south -
but to a lesser degree.

The next German offensive was Operation Sonnenwinde (Winter Solstice). On
January 5, Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS and commander of an Army
group, launched an attack across the Rhine at Gambsheim, a town ten miles
north of Strasbourg. He was headed directly into the VI Corps right flank. Two
days later, the German 19th Army crossed the Rhine south of Strasbourg. The
Germans were making yet another attempt to cut off the Seventh Army.
(Footnote 2: Schutzstaffel or Stormtroopers, also known as Blackshirts.

Task Force Linden, another American ad hoc unit made up of troops from the
newly-arrived 42nd 'Rainbow' Infantry Division, failed to contain the two
bridgeheads. Elements of the 14th AD, a few battalions from the 79th Division,
and the inexperienced 12th AD then began to deploy against the bridgeheads.

Gen. de Lattre threw in elements of the French 5th Armored Division and the
French 1st Infantry Division against the Germans south of Strasbourg.

Operation Sonnenwinde made few gains for the Germans, but it highlighted
the importance of Strasbourg to the Allies, especially to the French.

Even before the New Year's attacks, Gen. Eisenhower had ordered General
Jacob Devers to straighten the Seventh Army's front line and to withdraw to
more defensible positions in the foothills of the Lower Vosges Mountains. The
entire Western Front, from the North Sea to Switzerland, was adopting
a defensive posture. Many units were removed from Alsace and sent to the
Ardennes, thus weakening the forces in Alsace.

Gen. Devers was reluctant to give up ground won with his troops' blood. He
also knew withdrawal meant giving up Strasbourg. Gen. Charles de Gaulle,
leader of the Free French, criticized Eisenhower's plan to abandon the city and
threatened to remove French forces from the Allied Command and defend the
city with them. Strasbourg is the symbol of the French presence in an area
often claimed or annexed by Germany and holding the city was imperative for
reasons of morale and for the safety of the citizenry.  Eisenhower relented and agreed to protect Strasbourg, and Devers agreed to
prepare for a series of staged withdrawals -- if necessary.

The Germans had a distinct advantage in Alsace during the early days of 1945.
They kept the pressure on Allied Forces in at least three main areas. The
Bitche Salient in the West became extremely troublesome after the initial New
Year's attack. By January 4, elements of four German divisions were known to
be in the area. On January 6, the Germans began to probe into the Seventh
Army's vulnerable, lightly-held Rhine River flank, which extended 26 miles
north and south of Strasbourg.

The VI Corps had great cause for concern. The enemy was intent on keeping
the initiative and continued to push from the north through the Wissembourg
Gap. To meet the threat from the north, Combat Command A of the 14th AD
was attached to the 79th Infantry Division, and on January 6, the division
began moving to an assembly area north of Hagenau.

The VI Corps was threatened not only from the front and flank but also from
the rear. The Germans had been building up forces in the Colmar Pocket to
the south in preparation for a drive north on Strasbourg. It was said that
Heinrich Himmler, Commandant of the German Forces both in the Gambsheim
Pocket and in the Colmar Pocket, promised Strasbourg to Hitler as
a commemorative gift by the thirtieth of January, the twelfth anniversary of
Hitler's rise to power.

On January 7, the Germans attacked the French First Army. Their attack was
coordinated with the attacks in the Gambsheim Pocket north of Strasbourg.
The enemy brought much armor into play in these attacks.

The culmination of the German pincer-like movement was the battle at
Rittershoffen and Hatten. On January 5, the German XXXIX Panzer Corps,
made up of the 21st Panzer and the 25th Panzer Grenadier Divisions, began
moving south toward the two villages. More German troops would be engaged
later. All of the enemy forces in the battle were under the command of
Lieutenant General Arnold Burmeister.
(Footnote 3: For a later encounter with Gen. Burmeister, see Chapter XVIII, A Soldier's Return.

On January 8, the Germans drove viciously into the VI Corps Maginot Line
positions. Shortly thereafter, the 25th Panzer Grenadier Division began an
attack on the American positions in Hatten.

By all indications the Germans were attempting a quick breakthrough to
Hagenau, a large town on the edge of the vast Hagenau Forest south of Hatten
and Rittershoffen and a vital communications center. There the Germans
could effect a juncture for their troops crossing the Rhine and their troops
breaking out of the Bitche Salient.
If, indeed, such were the German strategy, the battle at Hatten-Rittershoffen
would be the key to the whole plan. So far as the Americans were concerned,
Hatten-Rittershoffen would be a fight for personal survival and a battle to save
Strasbourg.
(Footnote 4: Most Gls did not know that the Seventh Army was in danger of being cut off and annihilated.

For three weeks the fighting in Hatten-Rittershoffen was extremely fierce. Both
of the German divisions suffered heavy losses in armor and infantry. On
January 13, the German 20th Parachute Division arrived from Holland to
reinforce the enemy position at Rittershoffen.

Elsewhere, the enemy drive to take Strasbourg was growing in intensity.
Troops of the French First Army met German infantry and armor only ten miles
from the city's outskirts. The French asked to have the 2nd French Armored
Division and the XV Corps, in reserve west of the Vosges Mountains, released
to aid in the defense of Strasbourg. The request was denied: keeping armor in
reserve in the west was deemed essential. North of Strasbourg, Combat
Command B of the 12th Armored Division continued to hold its ground.

On January 20, the American troops in Hatten and Rittershoffen were ordered
to withdraw to the Moder River. The move reduced the 36-mile corps front to
26 miles. The Germans were left swinging at air, and the American positions
became more favorably disposed for the defense of Strasbourg.

Fighting raged in small pockets and villages all through Alsace as the
Americans withdrew. One soldier recalls, "It was a weird battle scene. One
time you were surrounded, the next time you surrounded the enemy. Often we
took refuge in villages where the Germans were upstairs and we were
downstairs -- in the same house. We heard them, and they heard us. If they
made no move, we left. If we made no move, they left."

The Germans made a final attack over the Moder River the night of January
24-25. Six German divisions struck. "The Germans had shot their last bolt in
France," wrote Charles Whiting in Operation Northwind, the Other Battle of the
Bulge. The Seventh Army, though tired and extended, was still intact.
In early February, 125,000 Americans, at a cost of 6,400 casualties, did its part in
reducing the Colmar Pocket. The last German fortress to fall west of the Rhine
was at Neuf-Brisach, southeast of Colmar.

Nordwind was costly for both sides. VI Corps losses for the period are listed
as 14,716 battle casualties. German forces sustained losses of 23,000 men
killed, wounded, or missing in action. Americans processed 5,985 prisoners.

Nordwind engagements clearly showed the quality of American arms. Often
outnumbered, the American troops, many of them inductees (i.e., citizen soldiers), fought the
German Army to a standstill. Gen. Devers said that the VI Corps fought one
the greatest defensive battles of all times with very little.

But Devers himself must also be given credit. His brilliant tactics held off fullscale
German attacks with almost no reinforcements or reserve troops.
Devers is all but forgotten ·today, for history has cast him into the shadow of
the more popular Patton, Bradley and the controversial Montgomery.
(Footnote 6: General Omar Bradley, Commander of all American troops in Europe, second in command
only to Gen. Eisenhower, and later Commander of the Twelfth Army.
(Continue Footnote: General Bernard Montgomery, Commander of all English and
Canadian troops in Europe.

Yet it was the Sixth Army Group under Devers, the 'orphan' of the Allied
Armies, who first reached the Rhine and the German border in late 1944. With
virtually no opposition, Devers was prepared to cross the river immediately
and strike into the heart of the German industrial area.

But Eisenhower overruled Devers. Eisenhower ordered Devers to proceed
north to support Patton's Third Army, which had bogged down in its offensive.

Historians can only speculate about the outcome of the War in Europe had
Devers been allowed to attack across the Rhine in December, 1944. The
ramifications are endless. Quite possibly, Operation Nordwind might have
remained on Hitler's drawing board.


Chapter IX: Hatten-Rittershoffen

Why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? (Psalm 42:9, KJV)

This chapter is about the battle of Hatten-Rittershoffen. Much has been written
about that engagement, and some of the articles go into great detail. Veterans
of the 14th Armored Division take great pride in the records of their individual
units in that fierce and bloody fight. The stories of personal experiences that
appear regularly in the Liberator are hair-raising, tragic, miraculous, dramatic,
and sometimes even humorous. My own recollections are hazy, for the entire
engagement is something of a blur to me. I recall some incidents and
impressions, but I have only a vague sense of the chronology and of the tactics
employed.

Our first assault on the villages of Hatten and Rittershoffen began in the late
morning of January 11, 1945. The 62nd Armored Infantry Battalion, with
Company C, 25th Tank attached, led the attack. The Assault Gun Platoon,
with our tank in the lead, followed about a quarter-of-a-mile behind. Our
mission was to seize the high ground north and east of Hatten. We had to go
across fields, not on roads. The ground was covered with snow, and the tanks
slid around a lot. We were in open country, and our tanks stood out against
the snow. We should have had some white camouflage.

I was acting as tank commander when we first engaged the enemy. John
Donges, our regular tank commander, was away getting instructions from
Lieut. Martin at the Company Command Post. Normally Carl Phillips would
have taken over, I would have become gunner, and someone would have been
brought in to act as loader. However, Carl was the most experienced and
skilled gunner in the crew, and since our very lives might well depend on the
gunner's skills, I took over as commander. I expected that most of what I was
to do would be directed by radio from the outside: I would relay messages to
the driver and gunner. But that is not how things worked out that day.

The crest of the ridge overlooking Rittershoffen was especially icy. When our
platoon moved over the ridge, we saw German tanks several hundred yards in
front of us. As soon as we were exposed, we drew fire from them. One of the
C Company tanks was hit three times and started to burn. Several of the crew
were wounded but managed to get away. Another tank was hit right after that,
and the tank commander was killed.

I was standing in the turret of the tank with both of my hands resting on the
outside of the tank when a piece of shrapnel whistled by. I heard it coming but
could do nothing to avoid being hit. A fragment creased my thumb. I managed
to stop the bleeding and stayed with the tank. Immediately, an anti-tank shell
hit our tank at the top of the turret where the armor curves from the side to the
top. The shell struck a glancing blow and gouged out a piece of steel from
the tank; the hole looked as if it had been made with an over-sized ice cream
scoop.
(Footnote 1: I had my hand treated later at an aid station.

Because we were being fired upon, I ordered Eddie, our driver, to back up. He
had to turn a little, and we started to slide down the hill sideways. Other tanks
were sliding down the hill, too. I heard about a tank that slid into a German
tank. The two tanks were side by side, pointing in opposite directions. After
some maneuvering, the American tank managed to disentangle itself and fire
upon the German tank. Later, the American crew looked into the blown-up
tank and found it to be empty. It had been harmless all the time!

All of the tanks, American and German, had trouble. Had the situation not
been so serious, it would have been comical -- all those tanks from both sides
sliding around like clumsy comedians in an ice show!

It was difficult for any tank to get into position to fire on the enemy. The
American tanks had an advantage. The turret on a Sherman tank could
traverse through 360 degrees and was power driven, whereas the turret on
a German tank was limited to 30 degrees and had to be moved with a hand
crank system.
(Footnote 2: We heard of a gunner who knocked a German infantryman off of his tank by moving the
turret very fast. The speed of the turret and the length of the gun barrel allowed him to hit
the intruder behind his knees and send him flying.

Somehow we managed to find some protection. The Germans, too, were
scrambling for cover, and some of their tanks were knocked out. In the
confusion of trying to maneuver on icy ground and keep alive at the same time,
I lost all sense of time and direction. I shouted a lot of orders into the mike,
and Eddie did a superb job of getting us out of a sticky situation.

The commander of C Company used an innovative approach to the ice problem.
His company, approaching Hatten from the west, was to assist the 94th Cavalry
and elements of the 79th Division trapped in the town. Going either on
the roads or across open fields was almost impossible because of the ice. The
company commander noticed on his maps that the railroad serving the two
towns ran south of both of them and in a straight east-west line. He managed
to get his company of tanks, 17 in number, to the railroad. He then led them in
his command Jeep for several miles by bouncing along on the railroad ties.
Theirs was a rough ride, and always there was the possibility that the railroad
bed had been mined. But the company made it to Hatten without incident and
without any of the tanks sliding off into some ditch.

After our platoon reassembled, it was given the mission of firing at sectors of
Rittershoffen. Our specific assignment was to fire on a part of the town that
included the home of the people with whom we spent Christmas Eve. I asked
for and was granted a different mission. Sgt. Donges returned, so I resumed
my position as loader.
(Footnote 3: Years later, I learned how that family fared during the battle. Berthe Holzmann wrote me
a long letter in which she described in detail that terrible time and the months that followed.
The text of her letter is included in Appendix E.

The platoon soon had another assignment. We were to fire indirectly on two
neighboring villages, Buhl and Stundwiller. All the rest of that day and into
the night we were engaged in an artillery duel. Many times we could hear the
rattle of shrapnel against the outside of the tank, but we never received a direct
hit. That day our platoon discharged 12 70 rounds of artillery shells in almost
continuous firing. Of those 12 70 rounds, our tank fired 260. I have forgotten
the weight of a shell, but I remember I was very tired after slamming 260 of
them into the breech of the big gun. Our tank carried about sixty 105mm
shells. In order to fire 260 of them, we had to restock the tank several times
under enemy fire. The Service Company truck drivers and other members of
our crew helped me, but I still had to handle every round of ammunition that
was restocked. My hand throbbed, and sometime towards the middle of our
fire mission I dropped a shell onto my big toe. I still have the marks, both on
my toe and on my thumb.

While all this was 
going on north of town, other elements of the division were
attacking from the south. Soon Hatten and Rittershoffen were infernos.
(Footnote 4: In 1995, we learned that the two villages were 80% destroyed.

The civilians that lived in the two towns suffered terribly, and there were many
casualties. A man and woman and their young daughter were seen trudging
alongside an ox-drawn cart that carried a few of their most precious
belongings. They were leaving Rittershoffen to go to Hatten -- Heaven only
knows why! -- when a mortar shell landed on the cart and killed them all.
(Footnote 5: The fiftieth anniversary observation in 1995 began with a memorial service for the 80
civilians who died.

Another incident involved a German soldier who fired a flame-thrower
through a basement door because he thought Americans were hiding on the
premises. The basement was full of civilians. Their screams could be heard
above the noise of the shooting.

We retained our position on the ridge north of Rittershoffen for most of the
battle. On a few occasions we were sent into the village. We were to cover
infantry troops advancing into the town, shell the town directly, and bombard
nearby enemy positions with indirect fire. When firing directly, we were often
engaged in tank duels. When firing indirectly, we received counter-fire almost
constantly. Artillery duels are very scary and noisy. I do not know how much
damage we inflicted on the enemy.

Nights were bitterly cold. The infantrymen of the 62nd Armored Infantry
Battalion around us almost always had to sleep in foxholes. On rare occasions
they slept in houses, but being in a house was considerably more dangerous
than being out in the open.

I was not involved in the house-to-house fighting as I had been in Gertwiller,
but I was told of many incidents that happened in the villages. One involved
a group of soldiers congregated in one room on the lower floor of a house.
A German soldier appeared in the doorway. His hands were up, and he shouted
Komrad! The Americans were taken off guard momentarily. The German then
stepped aside and his companion behind him sprayed the room with machinegun
fire.

On most nights tankers slept in or on their tanks. The metal was very cold, and
the cold penetrated through sleeping bags. On a few nights we slept in a barn
located a short distance behind the ridge position we maintained. On the first
night in the barn, I was warm -and comfortable in some hay. My guard shift
was hours away, and I looked forward to some much-needed sleep. I was soon
awakened by an artillery barrage. Looking straight up towards the top of the
barn, I could see bright flashes through the cracks in the ridge-line of the roof.

I knew that if I could see the shells going over the barn, sooner or later they
would hit the barn. I quickly put my boots on and was about to get out of the
building when John Donges, who was already up, shouted for me to join him in
a small room with walls and ceiling made of concrete. There was a cow in the
room; she had been put there by the farmer-owner for the same reason that we
were in the room -- for protection. The room was in a corner of the barn;
during peacetime it was probably used to store stools, pails, and other milking
paraphernalia.

We stayed in our concrete bunker for a time, but it was very crowded. I don't
know how many people -- and one cow -- were in the bunker, but we had little
room to move around. I decided I might be safer in the tank, which was about
fifty yards from the barn, and determined to make a run for it.

I picked up my
outer garments from my sleeping place and watched from the door for a lull in
the artillery barrage. No such pause came, so I ran for the tank. Just as I got to
it, the shelling seemed to increase. Rather than expose myself even more by
climbing up to the turret hatch, I crawled under the tank and waited for
a chance to get into the tank. To complicate matters further, I could not see our
guard. I certainly did not want him to mistake me for an infiltrating German!
In truth, the guard had climbed into the tank when the barrage started.

Finally, when I thought it safe enough to crawl out, I mounted the rear of the
tank and pounded on the closed hatch. The guard opened it, and I got in. One
detail escapes me. I knew our crew members very well, and this particular
incident is indelibly imprinted on my memory; yet I cannot remember who was
on guard when I reached the tank that night.

Later I dashed back to the barn
and brought back my sleeping bag and whatever else I had left behind. Quite
a few of the soldiers were still there; some had slept through the whole thing.
I suppose their thinking was "Anything to get out of the cold!"

I sought the shelter of our tank on another occasion and once more had to settle
for crawling under it. Again timing was important, and I could not get into the
tank quickly enough to avoid enemy action. Our position was exposed, so we
were easy targets for enemy air attacks. The German Luftwaffe bombed and
strafed us constantly with their new jet planes, but the new planes were too
fast for the pilots. They could not adjust their aiming points to the increased
speed, and their bombs fell a great distance beyond the intended targets. Their
machine-gun fire also missed badly. I am glad they were inexperienced!
(Footnote 6: The pilots may not have had enough training in flying jets because airplane fuel, especially
jet fuel, was very scarce in Germany, and using fuel for training may have seemed a luxury
they could not afford.
(Continue Footnote: After the War, I saw a great many new, unused jet fighter planes parked on airfields at
Innsbruck and Munich.

Conventional, i.e. non-jet aircraft also bombed and strafed us many times while
we were on that ridge, and the pilots in those planes had much more skill than
the jet pilots. Fortunately we took only a spattering of their fire, no armor piercing
ammunition.

One day I had an errand that took me about a quarter-mile away from our
tank. Moving around at all was very hazardous, so my assignment must have
been important. Upon my return I passed a tank destroyer company that had
just received a fire mission. I stopped to watch. There was a certain humor in
the crew's actions. The tank destroyer company was made up of black soldiers
exclusively. In 1945, the Armed Forces were not integrated, so black
servicemen had their own units. After each salvo was fired, one of the soldiers
would shout, "Mr. Hitler, count yo' chillun!"

Hanging around to watch was a big mistake. The firing naturally drew
counter-fire, and suddenly I found myself in another artillery barrage. I was
not so lucky this time as I had been before. A mortar shell exploded near me,
and I received some shrapnel wounds in my back and right leg. Such wounds
were sometimes called 'salt and pepper wounds' because the fragments were
very small. I was not incapacitated, so I ran or crawled away as fast as I could.
Soon there was pain, however, and I was alone in a kind of no-man's-land.
(Footnote 7: I was quite sure that it was a mortar shell because an artillery shell would have given several
seconds' warning. As an artillery shell approaches, it makes a screaming sound. During that
time, one can 'hit the dirt.' A mortar shell just goes whoosh! bang!

I remembered what to do to alleviate pain from my first aid training. I went
behind a small building and opened my first aid kit, got out the morphine
ampule, and clumsily administered the drug to myself. I doubt I got more than
about a fifth of it, but it eased my pain.

I managed to get to an aid station, but it was under fire, too. The medics
removed most of the shrapnel.
(Footnote 8: I still had some shrapnel in my leg when I was discharged. Over the years pieces work their
way to the surface, so I may or may not have any left in me now.

It was cold in the aid station, and I had to take
off most of my clothes. After receiving emergency care, I got dressed with the
help of one of the medics. I was glad to be out of the way. There were
wounded coming in, and they were much more in need of care than I. Those
already given treatment were put into another room. No one was allowed to
leave until nightfall, and the aid station was getting crowded. Under the cover
of darkness, the wounded were evacuated and supplies brought in.
After about an hour of hanging around the aid station, I decided to make my
way back to the tank. It seemed safer than where I was. The aid station
personnel were too busy to notice if I were there or not. Eventually I made it to
the tank and decided to stay there. My clothes were torn, and I was all
bandaged up. But there was no more bleeding!

The battalion aid station
physician had given me a few pills to counteract pain, and I took one that
evening. The wounds were superficial, and I wanted to stay with my crew.
The alternative, riding an ambulance through artillery fire in the dark on icy
roads, was not all that appealing either! In spite of my earlier experience in
the barn, I decided to spend the night there. I had to lie on my stomach, but
I was warm and cozy. I was excused from guard duty, and I slept through until
morning. There was another big artillery barrage during the night, but I never
heard a thing!

Our battalion was part of Combat Command B. There are three combat
commands in an armored division, viz. Combat Command A, Combat Command
B, and Combat Command R. Book tactics call for one of them to be held in
reserve. At Hatten-Rittershoffen all three were committed to action. We had
no reserve forces.

For the Americans, Hatten-Rittershoffen was a defensive battle. We were trying
to prevent the Germans from breaking out onto the Alsatian plain and retaking
Strasbourg. Because we were fighting defensively, our attacks were really
counter-attacks, but, as in football, sometimes the best defense is a good
offense. Such seemed to be the tactic employed by some of the Americans
trapped in Hatten.

I did not know it at the time, but two of my friends from the Army Specialized
Training Program were among them. Tom Bryant and Harvey Sabinson, both in
the 94th Cavalry, were in Hatten throughout the battle. Harvey received
a battlefield commission. After his platoon leader (a lieutenant) platoon sergeant, and
squad leader were killed or wounded, Harvey took charge. I think that he was
a corporal or private first class at the time.

Our platoon never got into Hatten.
Had I known my friends were there, I would have wanted to be in one of the
tanks sent into Hatten to help the trapped troops. (Easy to say now, of course!)
C Company's entry into Hatten along the railroad tracks was such a mission.

I became a corporal sometime in January. Details like promotions were ignored
during the fighting, so I did not learn of my new rank until we were out of the
Hatten-Rittershoffen area. I was promoted again shortly thereafter. Crews
were being changed all the time because of casualties. I was a loader, gunner,
and tank commander at one time or another. Lieut. Martin, our platoon leader,
took over as A Company Commander, and Sergeant Frank Reissner took over the
platoon. Frank accepted a battlefield commission, so he then had the rightful
rank of a platoon leader. Because there were so many holes in the various
crews, everyone was expected to do whatever needed doing. I must have
impressed someone during the battle because I was offered a battlefield
commission. I declined for several reasons, the main one being that junior
officers had a high rate of mortality. I had seen Lieut. Tomey killed at
Gertwiller, Lieut. Kirby severeliy wounded at Kapsweyer, and Lieut. Klinefelter's
lead tank hit and badly burned.

We went with very little sleep, and the weather was terrible. Under such
conditions, one would expect more illness than we experienced. The body must
make some accommodation for unusual exposure.

There were exceptions, of course. Carl, our gunner, became ill after about six
or seven days in Rittershoffen. His symptoms were those of a bad cold.
I rounded up all the powdered lemon from K rations that I could find and made
several steaming hot lemonades for him every day. Most of the fellows did not
use their lemon powder anyway because they preferred coffee and chocolate.
I heated the water on a portable Coleman-type single-burner stove. Taking
care of Carl was difficult because we were so busy fighting the Germans. I took
over as gunner for much of the time after Carl got sick. George Johnson acted
as loader, and Carl sat in George's bow gunner's seat in an effort to keep warm.
Carl was sent to a field hospital after we got out of Rittershoffen. There he
learned he had pneumonia.
(Footnote 10: Carl wrote to me in 1993; he hoped I could help him obtain financial assistance from the
Veterans' Administration. He had recurring respiratory problems that he attributed to having
pneumonia while in Service. He needed someone to vouch for his having been ill. I was glad
to help and wrote to the VA -- but to no avail. Carl was denied his request.

We were under constant shelling and frequent air attacks. All of the 14th AD
units as well as the 79th and 42nd Infantry Divisions suffered heavy casualties.
Moreover, we were unable to dislodge the enemy from either Hatten or
Rittershoffen.

Finally the order came from VI Corps to withdraw to previously prepared
defensive positions. Withdrawal was scheduled for January 20-21, but there
was an unexpected complication. The division engineers had laid mine fields
behind the lines and had neglected to inform the withdrawing units of their
exact locations. Several inches of fresh snow fell the night before the first units
were to leave, so they could not see where the engineers had been. The
commander in the lead vehicle chose a route that seemed impossible for tanks.
He reasoned that the engineers would not bother to mine that area. He was
right! None of our tanks hit a mine.

Our departure was inauspicious. The last tanks had guns pointed to the rear.
We moved slowly and as quietly as we could. All kinds of vehicles clogged
the roads. A 155mm artillery piece skidded and blocked our way. The column
was backed up for miles As if in a commuter gridlock at rush hour, we sat
waiting in the tangle of tanks, Jeeps, and half-tracks. I remember thinking to
myself, "What if the Germans attack now?"

But they didn't!
(Footnote 11: There are as many versions of the withdrawal as men who were there. More than one
soldier and crew claim to have been the last in town. Our platoon thought we were. Most
likely we were not. I think that C or D Company of our battalion may have had that
distinction.
(Continue Footnote: I read about two infantrymen guarding a crossroads who were forgotten by their company.
Their last encounter with the enemy turned out to be a cow slowly moving in the snowy night.
They made it out of town and lived to write about their last night in Rittershoffen.


January 11 through January 20, 1945, must have been the most harrowing ten
days of my life. Because I was living on the edge the whole time, my
recollections are almost surreal. Yet some things stand out:

Pumping adrenaline during fire missions.  The loader works harder than anyone
else in the crew.

Frozen K rations.

A hot meal.  The mess truck reached our ridge a few times.
What brave cooks!

Infrequent but welcome chances to use a sleeping bag
and get warm.  Tank crews spent most nights huddled in their tanks,
freezing in that coldest of winters.  The infantrymen
had to spend nights in foxholes.

Waiting, always waiting, for something to happen -- incoming
artillery, enemy attack, whatever.  The Germans used some paratroops
as regular infantry in the battle.  This we learned
when we captured a few of them.  Thus we had yet another worry:

We could be attacked from the rear by paratroops
dropped behind us.

Being caught in the open at night when the
Germans launched flares.  A flare lit up the sky as
if it were day.

Wondering about our "Christmas family" in Rittershoffen.

Not being able to wash my face, brush my teeth,
shave, or put on clean clothes.

Almost constant shivering, either from cold or
sheer terror.

Horrible artillery barrages.  Sometimes the night
was so bright from the combined shellings that roosters, mistaking the
light for dawn, crowed all night.

Having to leave the protection of the tank for any reason.

Two-hour guard shifts in the middle of cold, starless nights.  Imaginations
ran wild as one could see the enemy in every shadow.

Concern for Carl.  He had a fever.  We split up his
guard shifts.

Worrying about my family.  I was unable to write
home.  We had mail once or twice during the ten days of the battle.
I received a few letters from my parents.  I hoped that they did not
know or suspect just where I was or what was happening
to me.

Praying, always praying

God, don't you hear me??

Chapter X: Defense

Evening and morning, and at noon, will I pray and
cry aloud. (Psalm 54:17, KJV)

After Hatten and Rittershoffen, the 14th Armored Division took up positions
defending the Lower Vosges mountain passes and the city of Strasbourg.
Everyone breathed a little more easily now that the battles were over, but
another German offensive could still be launched. After a few life-and-death
struggles, a soldier is always wary, always looking over his shoulder.

Our first stop was Hochfelden. We did not stay there long, for soon the
division moved to occupy several small towns south of Hagenau, the next
strong point the Germans were likely to attack. Hagenau is on the Moder River,
a natural barrier to the German advance. The 14th was to cover any parts of
the river shallow enough to ford, also any bridges in the sector. Our platoon
was dispatched to a small town several miles south and west of Hagenau.

Before I did anything else, I went to a field hospital to be checked over. It was
located about thirty miles back of the lines in a middle-sized French town. The
hospital was in a warm and pleasant building that probably had been used for
government offices. I got cleaned up and was examined. The battalion aid
station medics had done a wonderful job. I rested for a few days, but then
I went back to the 25th. I did not have that magic 'million dollar wound,'
a not-too-serious injury that would send a soldier home.
(Footnote 1: A broken leg was typical of such a wound. The Army didn't have time to wait for the bone to
set, so anyone with a broken leg was sent home. A broken arm was not a ticket home. The
Army's logic escapes me.

On January 25, we received orders to move in a northeasterly direction and
seize Schweighausen, a town several miles west of Hagenau and on the river.
We were also to cut the roads leading to the town. The Germans had
accomplished what we had hoped to prevent. They crossed the Moder River,
penetrated the 42nd 'Rainbow' Infantry Division's defensive positions, and
were threatening to surround the troops in Hagenau.
(Footnote 2: Douglas MacArthur's division in World War I.

Somehow, long since forgotten by me, our platoon got into Hagenau, and there
we found ourselves in another mess. I had been helping out as crew member
in several tanks. I did everything but drive. Most of the time I acted either as
tank commander or gunner. The replacements we expected after the
engagement at Hatten-Rittershoffen were slow in arriving. Frank Reissner, our
new platoon leader, asked me to share his quarters for a few nights. I was
without a permanent tank assignment at the time, so I stayed with him.

Frank and I slept in a room that had direct access to the outside. The door was
about halfway down a dark passageway that ran perpendicular to the street. It
was narrow because the house next door was very near. We closed the shutters
and drapes. I went outside to see if any light showed through. None did, so we
settled down for the evening. Occasionally an artillery round whistled into the
town, but there was not the incessant pounding of an artillery barrage.

Frank set to work censoring mail, a new chore to him. All outgoing mail had to
pass through a censor. Frank was an officer -- or soon would be -- so his
lieutenant's bars qualified him to do the job. He had a razor blade and a pile of
enlisted men's letters. I did not envy him.

I tried to read a little, but I soon felt tired decided to turn in. I checked with
my old crew to see if they might need help on guard duty. They did, and I drew
an early morning shift.

I went back to our room to tell Frank and then went out agam to use the
outhouse. At the end of the very dark passageway a group of Germans grabbed
me. I was without my gun, and I thought to myself, "How foolish to move
about unarmed!" In retrospect I realize I was lucky not to have had my
weapon. If I had tried to resist or shoot it out with my captors, they would
have killed me. The Germans were holding two GIs from the infantry also. The
three of us were hustled across the river. Going across the bridge was scary.
I was afraid that some American GIs would see us and start firing. Once across,
we were told to jump into the back of a truck. We did not go very far before
being taken into a house for questioning. We were asked exactly what one
would expect. The interrogating officer spoke some English, and for the
moment I pretended to know no German. We wanted to make his task as hard
as possible. He asked about our units, the strength of the American troops in
that sector, and immediate battle plans. Much of that information was beyond
our knowledge anyway, so it was easy for us to play dumb. Every soldier is
instructed from the very beginning of his training to invoke the Geneva
Convention in such a situation. According to the rules, a captive has to divulge
only his name, rank, and serial number.

The interrogation did not last long because American artillery batteries began
to shell the place. Again I was caught on the wrong side. Any artillery barrage
is bad, but how much worse it is to cower and shiver with fright while being
shelled by friendly fireI Eventually the barrage stopped, and the officer in
charge decided to send us farther to the rear. As we were getting into the
truck, the driver took off, and we all tumbled out and headed for cover. One of
the fellows lagged behind and had an encounter with one of the guards. He
managed to escape and joined us. We found our way back to the bridge
without too much difficulty. Getting across was something else. We did not
want to attract attention from either side. We finally made it by crawling on
our stomachs. I had been gone for several hours. Frank was asleep when I got
back.

Technically, I had been captured. But I really think the German officer in
charge wanted us to escape, either to have an excuse to shoot us or to get us out
of the way. He had other things to think about without having to bother with
Prisoners Of War.

An interesting sidelight: I never learned the last names of the other prisoners.

I arrived back in time to do my guard shift. I hadn't had any sleep, but
I managed to stay awake anyway. In my frame of mind I almost hoped I would
encounter some Germans. I wanted to frighten them as much as they had
frightened me.

The next morning we had tales to swap. My experience was not even close to
tops on the 'harrowing' scale. I think Eddie Berg's deserves the honor. Eddie
was sleeping with some other tankers in a brick schoolhouse. His was the last
in a row of sleeping bags, so his head was right in the corner of the room.
Sometime during the night, he had to get up to go outside. When he returned,
he found the room in which he had been sleeping empty with a big, gaping
hole in the corner where he had lain. His head would have been right where
the artillery shell exploded, had he not gone out.

The same artillery barrage hit
a track on the Donges tank and put it out of commission. Our original crew
had a penchant for losing tanks without having anyone injured.

Replacements arrived sometime in late February, but there were not enough of
them to fill all the crew vacancies. They were young, just out of high school.
Most of them were very naive. Don M was especially innocent and gullible.
He informed us that he was grateful to be in the armored force because a tank
is relatively safe. He said he had been told that nothing could knock out an
American Sherman tank, that the best the Germans had would not be good
enough to pierce its armor. We asked him who said that and quickly informed
him that a German 88 could go through a Sherman tank like a knife through
hot butter. To convince him further we showed him a few knocked-out tanks.
Even after that, Don did not take combat very seriously. He fell asleep standing
up while on guard duty one night. He caught it from the next soldier
scheduled to go on duty, who had slept about an hour into his shift. When he
went to relieve Don, Don was still asleep. The next night the sergeant in
charge handed Don a hand grenade and told him to hold on to it very tightly.
Then the sergeant pulled the pin. A hand grenade will not explode until
a release mechanism is activated -- which cannot happen as long as the
mechanism is held in a clenched fist. The sergeant told Don that he would
return to put the pin back when Don's shift was over. He didn't wait that long,
of course, because if Don had relaxed his hand he would have dropped the
grenade and killed himself and anyone else nearby. Don got the message!

There was another incident involving Don. It happened when our platoon was
off the line for a few hours. We had been fed a hot meal and were about to
take off. Don had to get from the mess truck back to the platoon, and he was
late, as usual. An eight-inch howitzer battery was dug in nearby. Don saw
a shortcut -- right in front of the big howitzers. Just then the battery had
a firing mission. A firing mission is always carefully timed. Don ambled in
front of the guns and held up his hand to signal that he wanted the fire held
until he was past. The air was blue with the expletives of the battery
commander! Even then, Don did not move very fast. So far as I know, Don
survived the War without mishap.

A lighter side to Don's early days with the 25th involved his singing. We asked
him what songs were popular.,in the States when he left. We had not heard any
new music for a long time. The first song Don sang for us was Don't Fence Me
In. He was awful, and we never did learn what the music of the day was. Don
was a good-natured kid, though. We all liked him and tried to keep him out of
harm's way.

One cold night we were all bedded down in a barn. We were warm and snug.
I did not want to get up for guard duty, but I had to. I groped for my boots,
found them at the foot of my sleeping bag, got dressed, and then stumbled out
toward our tank. The tanks in our platoon were drawn up in a line facing
a clump of woods that was about a quarter-of-a-mile away. The forest
provided natural concealment for German gun emplacements, so we were
uneasy about our position, especially at night. As I left the barn and
approached the line of tanks, I noted some activity. Several shapes (Ours or
theirs? I did not know!) were moving about in front of the tanks and toward
the woods. I walked quietly and soon noticed that the indistinct forms were
our guards.

There had been a snowfall the previous afternoon, and the snow
between our line of tanks and the woods was clean and untouched. The guards
were out in front of the tanks, scooping clean snow into their canteen cups.

There were three kinds of K rations, one for each meal of the day. Each had
a different drink -- coffee for breakfast, lemonade for lunch, and hot chocolate
for dinner. All of the drinks were made from powdered concentrate. The
guards were using the nice clean snow and the lemonade powder to make
lemon snow-cones. I reminded them that they could have been shot, either by
someone on the new guard shift or by Germans in the woods. Having said that,
I made a snow-cone, too.

One day Headquarters Company was issued a new weapon, a Sherman tank
with a rocket-launcher mounted on top of it. The launcher had eighty
launching tubes arranged in four rows of twenty tubes each. I was picked to be
commander of the new tank, an assignment I didn't relish. Somehow Frank got
me out of it. How he managed I do not know, but he protected all of his
platoon from being drafted into the new crew. We all wanted to stay away
from the rocket-launcher tank because it would draw German artillery fire as
soon as it fired any rockets. The Germans had a similar terror-inciting weapon;
they called it the Nebelwerfer. We supposed our rocket-launcher also had
a scare-tactic purpose, for both fired many rocket-propelled artillery rounds at
once. The sound of all that artillery coming in at the same time was terrifying!
(Footnote 3: The Sherman tank was a versatile vehicle. Besides its intended purpose as a fighting
machine, it was adaptable to many other tasks. A rotating drum with huge chains attached
could clear mine fields without harm to its occupants. With a bulldozer blade mounted on the
front, it could move all manner of debris out of the way.

Our troop movements in February and March were dictated by the attempted
thrusts of the Germans. We were on the defensive and reacted more than
acted. Because we moved a lot, the supporting tactical air units became
confused. Each of our tanks had an identification panel that was laid across its
back deck The panels were bright pink and were supposed to be easy to spot
from the air. A squadron of Lightnings, Lockheed P-38 fighter planes, strafed
us one bright day when we had the identification panels in place. We fired
back, and soon the planes left. They did no damage, and neither did we -- but
the incident made us angry. We later learned that the pilots were all new and
very young. They caught 'buck fever,' i.e. they shot too quickly in the
excitement of the moment, but to us they seemed to have little excuse for
shooting at friendly troops!

Sometime in March, we came into contact with the French troops in Alsace.
They had been busy south of Strasbourg, in the Colmar Pocket. As the Germans
pulled back, the whole of Alsace began to open up. One action I remember as
particularly disturbing. The French fank commanders rode on the outside of
their tanks and acted like movie cowboys. Their practices may have been
flamboyant, but they were also dangerous. The French tanks and tank
destroyers were with us when we went into action someplace in northern
Alsace. The French chose to fight in the open, disdaining the use of any natural
cover. They lined up their vehicles on a ridge, exposed to the enemy, and they
were picked off one by one. We hated to see that, but we were powerless to
help.

The Frenchmen were veteran troops and should have known better.
The French troops with whom we fought were supposed to be given
a prominent role in the northern Alsace fighting. Gen. de Gaulle wanted to be
assured that the French would be regarded as heroes in the defense of
Strasbourg. We cared little about the politics: we just wanted to be away from
the French troops. They were not with us long, and soon we were back to
fighting with other American divisions.

Strange and interesting things happen when a war is fought in places occupied
by civilians. I am not familiar with the breeding practices of the Alsatian
farmers, but I think that spring is calving time for them. Right in the middle of
the War, we witnessed a farmer assisting his cow in delivering her calf. I had
grown up in the country but had never seen the birth of a farm animal. The
farmer and his neighbors worked hard with the cow until finally a cute little
calf was born. We all cheered. Somehow it seemed especially appropriate that
amidst all the killing, a new life came into that village. I know it was only an
animal, but it was all we had. I never encountered the birth of an infant
during all the fighting, but life goes on, and there were babies born in Alsace in
1944 and 1945.

The second week of March we began what would become our last move
through northeastern Alsace. One day when we were going over our old
battlefields, we went about thirty miles without much resistance. On other
days we had to fight for a town two or three times. But we were convinced that
we would soon break out and get to the Rhine. We passed by Rittershoffen
with its bitter memories and headed towards some small towns north of the
Hatten-Rittershoffen area. We encountered stiff resistance around Altenstadt.
The German artillery and Nebelwerfer pounded us. Frank Reissner, our new
platoon leader, and Ed Kistner, his Jeep driver, were caught in the open while
looking for new positions for our platoon. When the artillery barrage lifted, Ed
looked for Frank but could not find him. He had been wounded and evacuated
by medics from the 36th Infantry Division. I felt bad about Frank. After
sharing quarters with him, I felt I knew him as a friend. His injury left the
platoon leader's spot open again. I inherited the position for the time being.

Shortly after being appointed acting platoon leader, I was assigned the point
position for a move -- in a Jeep! Jeeps had been used as point vehicles before,
but they were usually from the Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon. I was
especially wary of riding in a Jeep because of one particularly diabolical enemy
tactic. Many Americans folded the windshields of their Jeeps down -- in the
style of a 1920s roadster. When the Germans saw that, they strung piano wire
across the road about as high as the neck of an average-sized rider or driver. If
the Jeep were moving very fast, the piano wire would decapitate all the people
in the front seat. To counter their tactic, all American Jeeps had a vertical bar
welded to the front bumper. At the top of the bar was a hook that would
prevent the wire from sliding over the top. The Germans then used the same
wire as 'trip-wire,' that would set off explosives in the road. No wonder I did
not want to ride in a Jeep with nothing in front of us!

My driver was Ed Kistner. He was very good and had experience driving under
fire. He and I led the whole battalion as well as some infantrymen attached to
the battalion. It was a sunny spring day. Had it not been for the War, we
might have enjoyed the nice drive in the country. Everything went well for the
first few miles. A large building that looked like a school appeared on our left;
after the building there was a crossroads: Ed hurried through the intersection,
and almost immediately an artillery shell landed a few yards from it.

Ed and
I abandoned the Jeep and virtually flew into the ditch. The Germans had the
crossroads 'zeroed in,' and they had observers in the schoolhouse. They had
plenty of time to adjust their artillery to hit exactly when and where they
wished.

Now we were on one side of the crossroads, and the rest of the battalion was on
the other. After a while I crept back to the Jeep and got on the radio. I spoke
to the battalion commander, and he halted the column before it got to the
dangerous spot in the road. Next we had to locate the German guns and return
some artillery fire in an effort to still them. We actually wanted the Germans
to fire again so we could locate their guns. We had to tempt them. Ed and I in
the Jeep were to be the bait. We turned around and headed for the intersection
again. A few yards from the lethal zone, Ed gunned the engine, and we shot
through -- as if running a gauntlet.

We accomplished our purpose: the
Germans fired and gave away their positions. Our artillery observers had come
forward almost to the crossroads. Our own Assault Gun Platoon went into
action and gave covering fire so the column could pass through. I do not know
that we actually destroyed the German artillery batteries: I do know we silenced
them.

About March 20, we found ourselves back in the familiar surroundings of
Kapsweyer. The place was no more hospitable to us the second time there than
it had been on the first. In preparation for our advance into· the dragon's teeth
and the Seigfried Line, our artillery units fired a huge barrage. The big guns
from Corps Artillery were there, as well as our own 105mm and 155mm guns.

The big ones were 8-inch howitzers and 240mm rifles. All that artillery drew
counter-fire from the German batteries. The noise of the combined artillery
fire, both outgoing and incoming, was deafening. The preparations for our
next assault on the vaunted West Wall, i.e. the Seigfried Line, went on for
several days. A troop of the 94th Cavalry was with us, but it was not Harvey's
outfit. Their mission was to probe the German defenses and report their
findings to our Command Post. Our own Intelligence and Reconnaissance
Platoon was also busy snooping around the outskirts of the next town. The
cavalry, along with a squad of engineers from the 125th Engineer Battalion,
crept up to the first row of dragon's teeth. The engineers blew up that first
row. They determined that it would be too difficult to blow up all of the teeth,
so some other method of getting into town had to be devised.
(Footnote 4: John Copes was a member of the squad of engineers. For the incident of his watch, see Chapter VII,
Into Germany -- and Back, Footnote 9.

They decided to
build a treadway bridge across the tank traps and the dragon's teeth. They
built the bridge while under constant enemy fire. All during the preparation
time, our platoon was parked on the outskirts of Kapsweyer and facing
Steinfeld. We were firing almost constantly, and we were drawing counter-fire
all the time.

Finally, on March 22, we made a direct assault on Hitler's West Wall. During
one nighttime barrage, we took off down the road to Steinfeld arid the Seigfried
Line. I cannot imagine why we would want to leave at night, but we did.
Armor is never supposed to move when it is dark. Kapsweyer and Steinfeld are
separated by nothing but open fields. There was no natural cover, so we were
completely exposed. The days were getting warm, and the spring thaw made
the fields wet and soft. The column had to stay on the road.

About half-way to Steinfeld the whole landscape lit up. The Germans had fired
flares that illuminated the fields on both sides of the road. In addition to the
flares, enemy artillery shells were exploding all over. The fields and the road
were bright as day. We were sitting ducks. We could do nothing but go on
and hope for the best. The tanks were to cross the dragon's teeth on the
recently-erected treadway bridge. Before we had cleared the dragon's teeth, we
came to a stop at the outskirts of Steinfeld. A mortar shell hit one of the tank
trailers. The mortar shell did not detonate the ammunition in the trailer, but
it did start a fire that could ignite the whole trailer. Al Crawford, the
commander of the tank to which the trailer was attached, got out of the tank
and proceeded to unhitch the burning trailer. I was outside of my tank, trying
to find a way through the dragon's teeth. When I saw what was happening,
I ran to help Al. By the time I reached him, he had already gotten the trailer
hitch unhooked. He and I managed to move the burning trailer into a ditch.
(Footnote 5: The AG had 105mm cannons, and the line company tanks had 76mm guns. Because of the
frequent use of our tanks as artillery pieces, we needed more ammunition than the line
company tanks, so some AG tanks towed ammunition trailers. The trailers made backing up
difficult for the drivers, and the danger of their blowing up made the ammo trailers
unpopular.
(Footnote 6: Al received a citation for his quick response in this potentially dangerous situation.

About then the artillery fire increased, and I headed for cover. I hurried
through the open cellar door of the nearest building. My action was foolhardy,
but I was fortunate: there were no Germans in the cellar. I made the same
impulsive move into the Kapsweyer pillbox in December; I was lucky then, too,
for it was empty. This time I found American Gls.

Our mortar platoon had been firing mortar shells of smoke to hide our
movements. They especially wanted to 'blind' the enemy troops in the nearest
gun emplacements. Most of the houses at the edge of town were camouflaged
pillboxes. They were innocent-looking farm buildings, but when artillery
shells hit their sides, their .,_ tiles crumbled off and revealed six-foot-thick
reinforced concrete walls. The windows came away and exposed gun ports
arranged in tiers. The smoke mortar shells were concentrated on the streets
that had 'houses' from which we had received fire. Confusion reigned. The
mortar platoon people were pinned down by heavy artillery and mortar fire,
and smoke from their own shells had drifted back onto them. The whole
platoon -- with all of its gear, including mortar and ammunition -- crowded
into the cellar. The men didn't notice where they were when the severe
shelling started, so they were lost and afraid to venture from the relative safety
of the cellar.

The enemy seemed to be all around us. I waited until there was a lull in the
firing to tell the men that I had a pretty good idea of how to get back to our
lines. I seem to have a natural 'feel' for topography, and I thought that I could
grope my way. We took off single file. I felt sorry for the ammunition and
mortar bearers, who had to carry heavy loads plus their own weapons, but the
platoon leader did not want to leave anything behind. My first stop was a bad
one: we were right in front of a house that turned out to be a camouflaged
pillbox. I went back to the rear of the platoon to see that everyone was with us.
After a lot of running through streets and alleys, I finally got the platoon to
where it belonged. There they could set up their mortars and fire. I then had
to find my own way back to my own platoon.

In another part of town, an A Company tank inadvertently fired toward
a D Company platoon. There were a lot of mixed-up orders, and the scene was
like the cartoon of an unorganized stampede with cattle running in all
directions. Unfortunately, in all of the confusion Lieut. Klinefelter was seriously
wounded, perhaps by friendly fire. It was either reported or rumored that one
of Lieut. Martin's A Company tanks had made the goof. I sincerely hoped not.
I liked Lieut. Martin, and I knew him to be a courageous and cautious soldier.

Our battalion fought its way through the few fortified German towns on the
west side of the Rhine. The Germans began to surrender in numbers. Those
who continued to fight retreated to other positions and eventually tried to get
to the east side of the Rhine.

In our pursuit of the enemy, we found ourselves assigned to a mission with
some Algerian troops. The Algerians wore colorful uniforms, and some rode
horses. Most of them were very tall, and all of them were very black. It was
rumored that at night they would crawl among the foxholes in or near
'no-man's land' and quietly reach in and feel the helmets. If a helmet were the
wrong shape, its owner had his throat slit. Such stories may sound very
interesting and dramatic, but there was a down-side to the Algerians' being
with us. We could not stay in any town at night. The Algerian troops were
hard to control, and they looted and raped with little regard for the Geneva
Convention. Once, in the process of flushing out retreating Germans,
I cautiously entered a house and found nobody there. Some of the Algerians
followed me. There was a beautiful grand piano in one of the rooms, and I was
tempted to play it. But I remembered the training lectures that warned of
booby traps and stayed away. One of the Algerians, who had probably never
heard a word about booby traps, moved toward the piano, and I dove for cover.
Fortunately for him -- and me -- the piano was not wired to blow up.

After breaking through the Seigfried Line, our 25th Tank Battalion reverted to
Combat Command R, the combat command usually kept in reserve. I thought it
strange that we moved north to go into reserve because north seemed the
direction of the most action. The Germans were frantically trying to cross the
Rhine, so the front lines became ill-defined. German units were in chaos, but
we were not able to take advantage of their vulnerability. Our battalion
stopped in Pirmasens, where we cleaned vehicles, did the necessary repairs,
wrote letters, and awaited orders.

Col. Watson, the battalion commander, was gone for a few days, and Major
Howard Philips, the battalion executive officer, assumed temporary command.
Two tanks from our platoon and two tanks from Company B were parked in the
same courtyard. Maj. Philips did not like that and ordered us to move at least
two of them. Any concentration of tanks was a target for the enemy. The 'exec'
was exactly right, and we all knew it. The tanks were duly moved, and Maj.
Philips was happier for our effort.

The tanks had been parked together for the convenience of the crews. Fellows
from several of them met nightly for poker and bridge games. The safety of
everyone concerned should take precedence over the proximity of the game
tables, but we were getting sloppy. Officers like Maj. Philips had to bring us
into line. I played in some of the games, read a little, and wrote letters to all of
my correspondents.

The Rhine crossing was to be the next big event, but not one of us knew when
it would be. Even if I had known, I could not have written about it.

Chapter XI: Gotterdammerung

Thou hast been a shelter for me and a strong tower from the enemy. (Psalm 61:3, KJV)

Gotterdammerung means twilight of the gods. It is the title of the fourth and closing
opera in the Ring cycle by Richard Wagner. The term has come to denote the
collapse of any political or so~ial system that deludes itself into self-aggrandizement.
The leaders are usually self-proclaimed heroes or 'gods.' One of Adolph Hitler's
favorite musical works was Wagner's Ring. He would attend the Bayreuth festival and
identify his inner circle as a pantheon of deities.

After the Germans under Field Marshall von Rundstedt failed to break through
to Antwerp in the Battle of the Bulge or to the Verdun-Paris plain in Operation
Nordwind, the tide turned in favor of the Allies. It was obvious to everyone that
in a matter of time Hitler's Thousand Year Reich would come to a premature
end -- by about 990 years! The 'handwriting was already on the wall' after the
successful landings on the beaches of Normandy in June, 1944. However,
the Germans were stubborn, and much fighting still would be required before
Hitler and his henchman would capitulate. It is harder to stop an altercation,
be it a minor spat or a war, than it is to start one.

Gen. Eisenhower's strategic plan for ending the War was not good politically.
He considered Berlin to be of little strategic value. The city had no working
factories, its German government was falling apart, and it was far removed
from the arenas of action. Accordingly, Eisenhower directed the American
First and Ninth Armies in the north to proceed toward Berlin at a slow pace; he
was always careful to keep his lines well-ordered and to avoid unnecessary
exposure. To him, Berlin was not worth risking men and resources.

However, Eisenhower might have done well to consider the international
political situation. The Russians were permitted to get to Berlin and Vienna
before the Western Allies, and because they 'liberated' those cities, they laid
claim to predominance in occupational matters. President Roosevelt and
Prime Minister Churchill would have done well to intervene and counsel
Eisenhower about the importance of taking Berlin and Vienna.

Because there was a possibility of the Nazis' holding out in an Alpine redoubt,
the U.S. Third and Seventh Armies made a giant swing, first to the northeast
and then to the south, as they swept through all of Bavaria into Austria and
Czechoslovakia. Some German die-hards put up stiff resistance at strategic
points. Among the hold-outs, the most fanatic were the SS troops. They
fought as if they could still win the War. The battles for Nurnberg and the
Danube cities of lngolstadt and Regensburg were especially fierce, but Munich
and Berchtesgaden offered only token resistance. Many of the German
troops, especially the young people and old men, were only too ready and
anxious to surrender.
(Footnote 1: Boys as young as nine and girls only seventeen or eighteen were all made to bear arms for
Germany.

Fighting continued even after Hitler's suicide, but his death in the Berlin
underground bunker put to rest the rumor of a Nazi last stand in the Bavarian
Alps. Joseph Goebbels, Germany's minister of propaganda, also died of his
own hand in the bunker, and Allied authorities soon rounded up the rest of
Hitler's inner circle.

During the fighting, the Allies came upon many prison camps, all horrifying,
and release and care of prisoners became the concern of front line troops.
They found Holocaust camps and camps for political prisoners -- Dachau and
Buchenwald among them -- and Prisoner Of War camps such as Moosburg.
Because the 14th Armored Division played a very important role in the
liberating of prisoners, it became known as the Liberator Division.

The account of the division's liberation of the Moosburg Camp as written in the
47th Tank Battalion history reads:

On April 29, 1945, Combat Command A, 14th Armored Division was
stopped at the lsar River preparing for the assault on the Moosburg
Prison Camp. At 0600, a strange group strode into Command
Headquarters to meet the commander, General C.H. Karlstad. It
consisted of a German major representing the commander of the
Moosburg Allied Prisoner Of War Camp, Colonel Paul Goode of the
US Army, a group commander of the British Royal Air Force, the senior
American and British officers imprisoned in the Moosburg Camp, and
a Swiss Red Cross representative. The German major carried a written
proposal from his commander for the creation of a neutral zone
surrounding Moosburg and for all movement of Allied troops in the
vicinity of Moosburg to be stopped while representatives of the Allied
and German forces confer on disposition of the Allied Prisoners Of
War. The German proposals were rejected, and the party was given
until 0900 to return to Moosburg and submit an offer of unconditional
surrender or receive an Allied attack at that time. The Germans chose
to fight, and by 1030, German SS troops were lying dead in the fields
and the streets of the town. The American medium tanks were roaring
towards the camp. The tanks broke right through the double barbed
wire enclosure. There was some resistance from the guard towers, but
the tankers quickly neutralized the towers by blowing them away with
cannon fire. The official estimate of the total number of Allied
prisoners released was 110,000. There were Americans, British,
Canadians, Norwegians, Brazilians, French, Poles, Dutch, Greeks,
Rumanians, Bulgarians, Russians, Serbs, Italians, South Africans, New
Zealanders, Australians -- men from every nation fighting the Nazis.
Among the prisoners were twenty-seven Russian generals and sons of
four American generals. There were war correspondents, radio
commentators, and three Russian women doctors. Also among the
prisoners were eight of the 47th's own, soldiers from the very unit that
opened the gates. One tanker freed his own son. Around the city
were thousands of slave laborers, both men and women.

All combined to give the 14th the most incredible welcome it had ever
received. Tanks were slowed to five miles per hour as they went
through the camps - the press of prisoners was so great. The
prisoners cried and shouted and patted the tanks. "You damned
bloody Yanks, I love you," shouted a tall rangy Australian, and then he
threw his arms around a Jeep driver. A weary bearded paratrooper
climbed onto a tank and kissed the tank commander, tears streaming
down his cheeks. There were many, many more scenes of extreme
emotion.

The 47th Tank Battalion and the 68th Armored Infantry uncovered
almost a score of arsenals in the town. There were machine guns,
pistols, rifles, Panzerfausts, and ammunition.

That night many of the newly freed prisoners roamed the streets. They
broke into liquor supplies in stores and bars and took food from
restaurants and homes. They had Schnapps, Champagne, Cognac,
wine, chickens, pigs, lambs, geese, hams, eggs - whatever they could
find. Ex-POWs and ex-slave laborers, ex-concentration camp inmates,
soldiers and civilians, men and women, young and old,
representatives from every nation in Europe, drunk or sober, crying or
laughing - they roamed the streets that night and reeled along the
sidewalks - singing, shouting, kissing, wearing tall silk hats gotten
from who-knows-where, carrying stoves, chickens, geese, pictures,
sabers, and even cross-bows. The German civilians hid behind
shuttered windows.

The combat troops finally moved through the mad bacchanalia to
cross the river. The care of the released prisoners was turned over
to the rear echelon.

The liberation of a concentration camp was a grim chore. The 45th Infantry
Division with supporting elements of the 14th Armored Division marched into
Dachau, where they found the German machinery for Jewish genocide. The
cremation ovens were still warm, the corpses of recently gassed Jews still in
them. The Jews who were strong enough turned on their SS guards and killed
them on the spot. The Americans found themselves having to stop the murder
of the SS. Some of the SS troops donned prisoner clothes to avoid capture.
What a poor ruse! They could hardly pass for prisoners, not when they were
healthy and well fed! In the days following the liberation of the camp, some of
the officials of the city of Dachau were made to assist in the burial of dead
prisoners. They proclaimed innocence of any wrongdoing; they said they
knew nothing of what went on in the camp.

Many well-known people were incarcerated in concentration camps. Elie
Wiesel was interned in Buchenwald. He later became a writer and winner of
the Nobel Peace Prize. The Dutch ten Boom sisters were imprisoned in
Ravensbruck. Martin Niemoeller, a German pastor who protested the Nazi
regime and was involved in a plot to kill Hitler, was sent to Sachsenhausen and
later Dachau, where he was executed. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a German
theologian and pastor, was in the United States when war broke out and
elected to return to Germany. He was held in Buchenwald and executed near
the end of the War.

The United States Third and Seventh Armies continued their march south.
The War in Europe ended on May 8, 1945. The Allied Armies stopped fighting
and took up occupation duty.

Chapter XII: The Final Dash

O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end. (Psalm 91:6, KJV)

Easter, 1945, fell on April 1, the day I crossed the Rhine River. It was also April
Fool's Day, but hardly anyone noted that fact. We had more serious things to
think about. For some days before we crossed the river we had little contact with
the Germans. A few artillery rounds came in each day, and some nights
'Bed-Check Charlie,' the German pilot in the small reconnaissance plane, flew
overhead, but most of the time we sensed no enemy activity. There were few poker
and bridge games: most of the fellows read or simply engaged in quiet reflection.

I thought of many things:
I wish that I could have gone to some Holy Week services.
I haven't even seen a chaplain for weeks, and Easter is almost
here. Would this be the last time that I would be away from home
on this important day in the church year? Would the crossing be
difficult? Our crews have some replacements. Would they hold
up under fire? Why don't the Germans give up? Surely they
know that they cannot win. If I get through this, will I have to go
to the Pacific Theater? Letters from home are always cheerful.
What do my parents know or suspect?

Sometime in late March, it was rumored that some of us might be assigned to
use a new amphibious tank recently brought into our area for the Rhine
crossing. Other amphibious vehicles had met with mixed results in the
landings in Normandy. The amphibious Jeep, known as a seep, seemed to work
all right, but most tankers, myself included, were skeptical about driving
anything bigger than a Jeep out into the water.
In February, all of our platoon
members managed to avoid assignment to the rocket-launcher tank, thanks to
Lieut. Reissner, our platoon leader. Because he had been wounded, he was no
longer on the scene, and we had no officer to speak for us. We squirmed a bit
and hoped to avoid assignment to the amphibious tank. As it turned out, no
one from our platoon was drafted for amphibious duty.
(Footnote 1: The duplex drive (DD) tank, an M4 tank with twin propellers, was used in the Rhine crossing by
other units. An accordion-like canvas skirt that came up high enough to make visibility a problem
could be inflated to give flotation to the whole Rube Goldberg devise. The 3rd Division used
twenty-one DD tanks. Six did not make the crossing: one was destroyed by shellfire, one was
stuck in mud, two had the canvas skirt come off before launching, and two sank. The 45th
Division had fourteen DD tanks, all of which made successful crossings.


The Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon reconnoitered possible sites for
crossing the Rhine. The Germans needed bridges to get as many men and as
much equipment across the river as possible. The last bridge in our sector was
at Germersheim. When the Germans had no more use for it, they destroyed it
with pre-set charges of TNT. The Allied Forces crossed on a treadway bridge
built by the Corps of Engineers. The engineers erected the bridge in the
daytime while under fire from the enemy on the other shore. Tanks, tank
destroyers, and infantry covered them. When we crossed and saw what they
had done, we marveled at their bravery and skill. Installing the last part of the
bridge near the German shore must have been especially harrowing.
(Footnote 2: It crossed my mind that I might have been one of them had my engineering studies in the Army
Specialized Training Program been allowed to continue.

Our crossing was at Worms, a city rich in Reformation history. Sgt. Donges'
tank crew was not complete, so I rode with him in my old loader spot.
I preferred that to riding in a Jeep, the only alternative, because Jeep riders are
very exposed. I had already had one unpleasant experience riding the point in
a Jeep. We left the vicinity of Pirmasens sometime after midnight on April I,
and it was dawn by the time we moved down the river bank towards the
bridge. Even though the enemy did not challenge our movement, I was uneasy
about the crossing. The weight of a tank made the bridge sink a bit, and I felt
as if we were riding in the trough of a wave. I was reminded of walking on
'rubber ice' in the spring when I was a boy, and I couldn't forget that
I frequently broke through the ice -- especially if I stopped walking.
I wondered if the treadway bridge would act like that rubber ice. If it did, the
tank would break through the bridge and sink if it ever stopped. (Actually the
tank would not have sunk had it stopped, but I'd have been hard to convince
otherwise at the time.)

I hoped to see some places important in the Protestant Reformation, but we
moved through Worms and into the open countryside very quickly. I did notice
that the town was severely damaged.
(Footnote 3: Ruth and I visited Worms in 1980. The Reformation Memorial came through the War
unscathed, even though every building around it was a mass of rubble.

We met no resistance the first day east of the Rhine. Our column of tanks and
infantry went right through Darmstadt. At the edge of town we came across
a monument honoring Baron Manfred von Richthofen, the World War I flying
ace. von Richthofen became known as the 'Red Baron' for the color of his
Fokker triplane. He is the same Red Baron as Snoopy's nemesis in Charles
Schultz' comic strip Peanuts.
(Footnote 4: Seattle's Public Broadcasting System featured the Baron in a program on flying during World
War I.

The first night in Germany seemed strange. We occupied Gross Bieberau,
a village east of Darmstadt and near the Main River. It was quite different from
the Alsatian villages we had come to know and understand. There was no sign
of the War. All of the buildings remained undamaged, and the town was neat
and orderly. The Alsatian villages were farm communities, and all the houses
had barns attached. Gross Bieberau houses were more modern and did not
suggest a peasant population. White flags hung from all of the second-story
windows. The flags gave us a false sense of security. I thought that most of the
fighting was over and that the balance of our time in Europe would be easy.
The next five weeks would show how wrong I was!

When night came, we were nervous, even with the apparent resignation of the
townspeople, so we slept on or near our tanks instead of searching out billets in
local homes. We wondered if die-hard German troops might emerge from the
cellars. The night passed without incident, and our wonderful cooks had a hot
breakfast ready for us the next morning.

We crossed the Main River at Worth am Main (Worth on the Main River), near
Aschaffenburg, a well-known medieval city. We camped near the river the
day before we crossed. Someone threw a grenade into the water (I'm not sure
why!) and stunned a lot of fish. They rose to the surface, where we could easily
pick them up. We had fresh fish for dinner.
(Footnote 5: Ruth and I visited Aschaffenburg in 1985 and were privileged to see a famous painting by
Martha.us Grunewald in the Stiftkirche. The painting is kept behind locked lead doors. The sexton
opened them for us.

The Germans on the other bank
also caught fish near their bank. We were wary of the enemy (as were they of
us), so we grabbed our fish and quickly scrambled for cover. Eventually each
side recognized the other's intent, and no one fired a shot. The Germans and
we had made a sort of 'grenade fishing' truce!

More uneventful days followed. We crossed the Main again at Gemiinden,
where we saw the first of many Displaced Persons we would see throughout
our push east. DPs were always very courteous: they gave us the right-of-way
as we approached and cheered as we went by. All of the towns flew white flags
from their city halls. North central Germany is very pretty, and the weather
was pleasant. We were getting complacent and naively assumed that we were
no longer in any danger.

Sometime in early April, a group of Germans who had been hiding along the
Autobahn ambushed one of the our artillery batteries. The main body of our
column had already passed. Artillerymen are seldom called upon to fight as
infantry so many of them did not even know where their rifles were -- though
each of them had been issued one. These artillerymen acting as infantry
acquitted themselves surprisingly well. They drove off the Germans without
suffering any casualties themselves. The incident served as a reminder that the
War was still going on.

One of the tanks in our column met an unusual fate. We were moving slowly
along a narrow road that had a small stream running parallel to it. None of the
tanks had room to maneuver, so all were vulnerable to attack. Suddenly the
soft shoulder gave way, and the tank in front of mine slowly slid into
the stream. It came to rest on its side in about four feet of water. All the
members of the crew got out safely -- but half of the road bed in front of us was gone, and there was no room to go
around the big hole. Just then a boy informed us that he had seen German SS
troop activity in the nearby forest. Another tank commander and I scanned the
woods with field glasses but could see nothing. Each of the tanks behind the
hole was a sitting duck, and a concealed 88 could easily have picked off any
one of them. Several tankers ran back down the column to look for a way out
of the mess we were in. They found a way around the hole, but it went very
close to the woods in suspect. Each tank gunner turned his tank turret around
so he could cover other tanks. After about an hour of jockeying, we got back
onto the main road. A reconnaissance squad went to see if there were any
Germans in the woods, and it did, indeed, find SS troops hiding there. They
were flushed out and taken prisoner by a unit following us. The wet crew from
the tank that went into the river rejoined us later that day. They had retrieved
most of their belongings from the tank, and a Service Company unit even
managed to get the tank out of the water several days later.

From Worms we moved in a general northeasterly direction. We went through
Bamberg and took Lichtenfels on April 12. Lichtenfels was as far north as our
battalion went. Coburg is located about twenty kilometers north of Lichtenfels
and Bayreuth a little farther east. All these towns are part of the history and
cultural heritage of the German people. Except for Coburg, which I knew from
Reformation studies and history classes. I knew nothing of any of these places.
(Footnote 6: The Coburg Castle was Martin Luther's place of refuge during the Diet of Augsburg. Queen
Victoria's consort was Albert of Saxe-Coburg.
(Continuing Footnote: In 1985, Ruth and I stayed in a pension in Bamberg and visited the Coburg castle one afternoon.
We also toured saw the Wagner Museum in Bayreuth. We wanted to see the Wagner opera
house, known as the Festspielho.us, but we could not get tickets.

There was a great deal of confusion among both the German and Allied Forces.
The Germans frequently 'fell over each other' in trying to get out of our way.
Similarly, we were chasing the fleeing Germans as fast as possible, and
sometimes we ran over each other. In one village I saw two tanks, one German
and one American, at the same intersection. Each had been hidden from
the other by the house on the corner. Apparently each tank proceeded into the
intersection and was surprised by the presence of the other. The gunner from
each tank fired his big gun almost simultaneously. The result was strange.
Both tanks were abandoned and out of action. The American tank was not
damaged, but its crew members were all gone. The barrel of the rifle on the
German tank was split open. A part of the barrel was stripped back like
a peeled banana. We could only guess what had happened. The American's
cannon shell may have caught the edge of the opening on the German cannon
and stripped a1 side of the barrel back, or the German gun barrel may have been
clogged with debris and blown itself apart. We never knew for sure. The
incident was just one of the oddities of tank warfare.

At Haag, a town south of Bayreuth, our Service Company had to act as infantry.
The company had pulled off the Autobahn and set up a bivouac position in late
afternoon. The men were going about their ordinary chores when two boys
approached a corporal and told him that a large number of German soldiers
was in the nearby woods. Captain Arnold H. Green, the company commander,
believing that his company might be the victims of a trick, was super-cautious.
He assembled a force of twe... nty-five men and followed the boys into the woods.
After a short walk, they broke into a clearing and came upon a German supply
depot. They captured 433 German soldiers and ten women -- without firing
a shot. Some of the men picked up German Luger pistols as souvenirs.

After several skirmishes around Bayreuth, we headed southwest toward
Nilrnberg on the Autobahn. The city was famous for the Nazi Party rallies held
in the huge stadium. Some units of our battalion were scheduled to join
the 45th Infantry Division in Nilrnberg to participate in a victory parade. In
the midst of preparations, word came down from Division Headquarters that
we were to move again. We bypassed the city on the east and saw nothing of
historic significance.

The planners of the victory parade assumed that taking the city would be easy,
but it turned out to be very difficult. Nor was our way simple. Our immediate
objective was the Danube River. We hoped to find some bridges intact so that
getting past it would not be so difficult as crossing the Rhine had been.

Before considering the next action, please note the backdrop and the cast of
characters, i.e. the makeup of the tank crews in our Assault Gun Platoon, in the
dramatic sketch. As mentioned before, Lieut. Reissner, the platoon leader, was
wounded near Wissembourg on March 19, his wound sufficiently serious to
disqualify him from returning to his platoon. A battlefield commission was
then offered to several fellows, including me. No one accepted the commission,
so we were without an officer platoon leader temporarily. Sometime after the
Rhine crossing, one Lieutenant H was assigned to us. The new platoon
leader wanted to ride in a tank, so I relinquished my position to him.

Sgt. Donges had a tank with an empty spot, so I rode with him or in a Jeep. Eddie
Berg, the driver in our original crew, was the driver in Sergeant Jim Anderson's
tank. Technically speaking, Jim should not have been in a tank because his
Military Occupation Specialty number identified him as an artillery mechanic.
But he wanted to ride in a tank instead of a Jeep for awhile, and because he was
an able leader, no one objected. In other words, I should have been in a tank
with our original crew, and Jim should have been riding in a Jeep.

We were going straight south on the main north-south Autobahn. German
ME 109 planes bombed and strafed us, but we suffered no casualties. We ran
into trouble about twenty kilometers south of Niirnberg. A C Company tank led
the column; it was followed by the Assault Gun Platoon. When the point tank
reached a road junction near Gogglesbuch, it was knocked out by a well-hidden
German 88. The next tank was the one for which I was nominally the
commander, but Lieut. H was in charge.

The Germans let that tank
through. The tank commanded by Jim Anderson with Eddie Berg as driver
followed and was hit by the same anti-tank gun. The 88 armor-piercing shell
entered the left side of the tank just above the track. It went right under
Eddie's seat. He lost both of his legs. The shell went across the tank and
exploded in front of Gilbert Chapman, the assistant driver/bow gunner. The
exploding shell killed Gil. The tank began to burn, and the other three crew
members were severely burned. When we saw what was happening, several of
us ran towards the burning tank. While trying to help, we were under constant
machine-gun fire because the tank and the area around it were still under
siege. I got part way into the tank and helped to get the gunner out. Jim
Anderson managed to crawl out by himself. Ed Kistner, a Jeep driver, pulled
the loader out. I was most concerned about Eddie Berg because he was from
our original crew. The medics arrived shortly and wrenched Eddie loose. With
their litter-bearing Jeeps they were able to evacuate all the wounded at one
time.
(Footnote 7: Eddy died in the veterans' hospital in St. Cloud, Minnesota. Had I known in time, I would have
visited him. I only learned of his being in central Minnesota after he died.

When Carl Phillips, our gunner, came back from the hospital after his pneumonia,
he saw the results of the action and thought his entire old tank crew had been
killed. If Carl had been with us and we had all been together, things might
have worked out that way. Carl's illness and the subsequent crew juggling
spared some of us our lives but led to awful consequences for others. That
was the action for which Ed Kistner and I were recommended for Silver Star
citations.

A tank under the command of Sgt. Winslow was supposed to go through '88
junction,' a place highly infested by Germans. Dick Keskey, a friend of mine,
was the driver of the Winslpw tank. Dick told me years later that Sgt. Winslow
refused to take his tank through the junction after he realized that the Germans
could pick it off. He was reprimanded for his refusal.

A tank destroyer was brought up to fire on the German gun. The tank
destroyer was knocked out immediately, and the crew was fired upon by
artillery as they jumped to safety. The enemy gun had to be located and taken
out if we were to proceed. A captain, the commander of B Company, and his
driver went forward on foot in an effort to spot the gun. They were soon
pinned down by machine-gun fire. The captain was killed by a sniper, and his
driver narrowly escaped. Before the captain died, he stopped Sergeant Dean
Rumburg, a liaison between the battalion and the line companies, to tell him
of the gun position.
(Footnote 9: 1n the summer of 1949 or 1950, I read that Dean Rumburg died in an automobile accident that
happened between Spokane and Pullman, Washington. Dean was returning to school at the end
of summer. He played football at Washington State University, so the account of the accident was
on the sports page.

After the medics had evacuated all of the wounded from the knocked-out tanks,
I tried to get back to the head of the column -- or what was left of it.
Unfortunately, I was on the wrong side of '88 junction.' There were several of
us stragglers, and each of us took off on his own. I thought I could make it
back after dark, but I never got to try. The Germans kept the junction under
machine-gun and artillery fire, so I had to make my way to the Battalion
Command Post, which was several miles back. There was some traffic going
that way, and I caught a ride. When I arrived, there was another battle going
on!

A German counter-attack was in progress near Allersberg. Our tanks and
infantry had a good position overlooking the approaches to the town. We were
on a ridge, the highest point of land in the area. When I arrived in the town of
Altenfelden, I went to the Battalion Command Post, where I was told to get up
to the ridge because more crewmen were needed there. As I approached the
line of tanks, I saw a corporal jump up onto Col. Watson's tank and begin to
fire the 50-caliber anti-aircraft machine gun. He had to shoot: the Germans
were coming right at us. They made no effort to take cover, and they
maintained a nearly straight line. Finally, they broke and ran -- but not before
suffering many casualties. There was speculation that they may have been
drugged.

I sensed that the counter-attack was not over. The tanks from Gogglesbuch
were summoned to Altenfelden. The anti-tank gun must have been knocked
out, for all the tanks made it past '88 junction.'

Occasionally someone has to leave the relative safety of a tank and make
a reconnaissance on foot because the crew cannot see very well from inside
a tank. This was one of those times. We had to know what was over a ridge,
especially in the area immediately in front of our line of tanks. The ridge fell
away steeply, so we could see nothing beyond our enclosed positions. Usually
the tank commander does the reconnoitering.

One of the tanks on the ridge was under the command of Lieut. H. I tried
to get his attention by banging on the side of his tank. I did not want to get up
onto the back deck for fear of exposing myself to sniper and machine-gun fire.
After getting no response, I had to go up and open the tank commander's hatch.
Lieut. H was terribly frightened and did not want to move. I used stronger
language than was prudent, and he called my conduct insubordination and
threatened court martial. He saw to it that I lost my rank temporarily, but
a colonel spoke up for me. He had seen and heard enough of the incident to
witness in my behalf. But the fight was not over.

A few days later, the colonel asked to see me. I thought that I was in big
trouble. I knew Lieut. H felt that he had every right to charge me. I had
been angry, exposed to enemy fire, and impatient with him. The colonel did
little more than advise me to be a more careful in my speech. I was restored in
rank, and no more was said of the incident.

Lieut. H was the first officer whom I ever met, or even heard of, to whom
an unusual rule applied. In the Army of that day, an officer was advanced in
pay after a certain length of time -- even if he were not advanced to a higher
grade -- as a reward for his putting in time. It was said that Lieut. H was
a second lieutenant getting a first lieutenant's pay. The lieutenant was, in fact,
at a terrible disadvantage. He was a replacement only recently arrived in
Europe. With little or no battle experience, he was supposed to lead seasoned
troops -- not a good position to be in!

After the incident at Altenfelden, Lieut. H was not very popular and did
little to endear himself to anyone. He was arrogant and something of
a braggart. One evening not long after my run-in with him, some of us started
a poker game. I needed some cash to get into the game, so I offered a dress
sword I had taken off a captured German officer for sale. The lieutenant
offered to buy it. He said. he wanted to be able to tell his children and
grandchildren about the time he relieved a German colonel of his dress sword.
There was no way that I was going to let him have my sword! I sold it to
someone else for less than he offered, and I made the deal in his presence.
Looking back, that was a dumb move; The sword would be a great War souvenir now.

There were Germans in the forest to our left, so there was a real possibility that
they could get around our flank and reach our supply depot near Nilrnberg.
Once again our Service Company was pressed into service as auto and tank
mechanics became infantrymen. They did the job: they routed the Germans in
the woods.

Eventually the combined firepower of all of our tanks, all our mortar platoon,
and all of one division's artillery batteries forced the Germans to retreat. How
tragic that the Germans held out when they obviously could do little more than
harass us, all the time killing people on both sides!

After the events at Gogglesbuch and Allersberg, we continued down the
Autobahn toward the Danube River. Sometimes we moved too fast to tend to
personal care. One morning, after sleeping in the tank, I had the 4:00-6:00
A.M. guard shift. Rather than go back to bed at 6:00 A.M., I decided to clean
up. We were parked next to a stream. I shaved and bathed with icy water, but
I felt better. A cold water shave is hard on the skin.

Later that day we arrived in a town with a school. We took over the bright and
airy dormitories. We were becoming careless. We supposed that the Germans
would offer little or no resistance, and we expected the War to be over sooner
than it was. That night we had to leave the best quarters we had had in a long
time because of a heavy enemy artillery barrage. So much for thinking the War
was finished! We still had a ways to go.

Several days later we arrived at Ingolstadt on the Danube. Our sector of the
city had suffered some damage, but it wasn't bad. Another GI and I went
poking around in some apartment buildings located in what appeared to be
a middle class neighborhood. There we learned how German city folk lived.
We walked through the unlocked doors of an apartment that was nicely
furnished. It gave evidence of recent use. We noticed that there was no
portrait of Hitler on the wall. At the time, many German homes displayed
Hitler's picture, just as many American homes displayed Roosevelt's. We
wondered if perhaps the tenants had discarded the usual Hitler picture when it
became apparent that the War was ending and American troops would soon
arrive.

Special Services arranged a treat for us on our only night in Ingolstadt. We got
to go to the movies. The film starred Elizabeth Taylor in National Velvet, the
film that launched her career. I thought that it was a great movie.
(Footnote 11: I saw only two movies during the War, so I guess I would think any movie was pretty good.
Movies were more common after the War.

We crossed the Danube, neither beautiful nor blue at Ingolstadt, and proceeded
in a southerly direction. Some of our division went southeast, and some went
southwest. Our division was officially part of the Third Army at the time. (All
the while we were in Germany we were on the left of Gen. Patch's Seventh
Army or on the right of Gen. Patton's Third Army. We never knew which Army
we were in. Certainly, the 'big brass' knew, but we didn't -- nor did we care!)

We had one crew member that was extremely paranoid. I cannot recall his
name or when he was assigned to my tank, but I do remember what he looked
like. He was among the replacements assigned to us after the Gogglesbuch and
Allersberg actions. Somewhere south of Ingolstadt, we came upon
a train on a railroad siding. My paranoid tanker jumped out of the tank and
positioned himself with the 50-caliber machine gun mounted on the
turret. He started to shoot at the train. He intended to spray the train from one
end to the other. I had to restrain him. I am almost certain that the train,
a civilian train posing no threat, was empty, so he did no harm. After I stopped
him, I had the driver proceed to the tracks so I could get out and poke around
a bit. I found no sign of life. I was probably in more danger from our tanker
with 'buck fever' than I was from the enemy!

Our way south was hurried and haphazard. At least so it seemed to me. Many
times we were out of visual or radio contact with other parts of our platoon.
Once we came to a river we thought to be the Isar, which runs through Munich, with a bridge that looked
to be undamaged. I was suspicious, so I left my tank to examine it. Just then
several bearded and disheveled men came out of the woods to our left. They
frightened me, and I immediately ordered them to put up their hands. I spoke
in both English and German. They smiled broadly but paid no attention to
anything I said.

I tried to make my wishes known in halting French. That didn't work either.
Then one of them showed me a German Luger and even offered it to me. I was
getting less suspicious now, for they seemed to be surrendering or even
offering friendship. One of our crew suggested we give them pencil and paper,
whereupon one of the bearded men eagerly drew a sketchy picture of a prison
camp with guard towers and fences. He also wrote something. I recognized
the lettering as being Greek. We then communicated in sign language and
penciled pictures. One of the our guys admired the Luger. The Greek smiled
and with signs offered to get another if we wanted it. He went off in the
direction from which he had come, and a little while later we heard one shot.
He soon returned with another Luger. I shudder to think how he got it.

By that
time we realized that our visitors were Greek prisoners recently escaped from a
German prison camp. We knew that they must be hungry. The only food we
had were D rations, which are very high-calorie chocolate bars. The Greeks ate
them ravenously. We tried to warn them to take it easy because after a long
time on limited food, they very likely would become ill from the rich bars. And
they got sick! Fortunately we had re-established radio contact with the troops
in the rear and were able to send for an escort to take the Greeks to them.

When we crossed the lsar River, we were assigned to support the 45th Division
on our right. That division was in the Seventh Army, but I think we were still
officially in the Third. Solt\~time during our march south we had recrossed the
Isar and now approached Munich from the northwest.

It fell to elements of the 45th Division and its supporting troops to liberate the
concentration camp at Dachau. No one knew anything about Dachau, so
the horror of the camp was a shock to everyone. The details of my first
personal encounter with the Nazi 'final solution' are sketchy and mixed-up at
best. I find myself remembering impressions rather than being able to
reconstruct any 'story line' of incidents.

A lot of infantrymen on foot were positioned ahead of our tanks at the Dachau
entrance. Our tank was second in line after them. Many infantrymen from the
45th, who had been riding on tanks, dismounted and burst through the gate.
At first there was a great deal of shouting and confusion, but we soon knew our
tanks would not be needed for firepower. There would be no resistance. We
were up in our tanks, not on the ground, so we did not become involved in the
direct taking of SS troops or in the treatment of the prisoners. We were like
spectators -- but none of us was prepared for what he saw.

Such scenes have been well presented in cinema and on television. Aside from
the real footage that is frequently shown in documentary films, at least two
movies give some idea of a concentration camp's terror. They are Escape from
Sobibor and Schindler's List.

Anything you may have seen in such films -- be assured -- IS ALL TRUE! The
behavior of the town's citizens was especially contemptible, and we were
dumbfounded by it. They all pleaded ignorance of the goings-on inside the
camp. The mayor and other local dignitaries were forced to go through the
camp. A later incident, one that I did not witness, involved the removal of
bodies from the camp and carrying them in rude coffins to a suitable burial
place.
(Footnote 13: A famous picture in a May, 1945, issue of Life magazine shows the parade of well-dressed
Dachau citizens carrying the open coffins. Each coffin is borne by four townspeople.


We left Dachau shortly after arrival. We were called back to our battalion and
were no longer attached to the 45th Division.

Had we never been part of'the 45th Division, we still would have been exposed
to concentration camps. The 14th Armored liberated several satellite camps of
Dachau and the huge Prisoner Of War camp at Moosburg. Because of our
involvement in liberating efforts, the 14th Armored came to be known as the
Liberator Division. Its news periodical still carries the name Liberator. Its
official flag hangs among the flags of all U.S. Army units involved in the
liberation of death camps in the foyer of the Holocaust Museum in Washington,
D.C.

Hospital concentration camps14 were located at Ecksburg and Ampfing near
Toging, the town that our battalion occupied after the end of the War. When
the fighting stopped, men from a company of the 84th Medical Battalion were
sent to take over the two German hospitals. In them they found 300 former
Dachau inmates, physically starved and mentally tortured. The company
account read:

Conditions were indescribably bad. Sanitation did not exist. There were no
medical supplies and little food. Conditions were no better than those at the
main Dachau camp. A few nuns from a neighboring convent were doing
whatever they could to alleviate the terrible conditions. In about a week
(American) medics had the place clean and in good order. For many of the
patients, help had come too late.
(Footnote 14: A seeming contradiction in terms because prisoners were thought to get no care.

The Military Police brought a male patient to C Company of the same battalion
and told the medics to do whatever they could to keep him alive. He was
a German officer suffering from a massive overdose of sleeping pills. The
medics pulled him through, and when he finally regained consciousness, it
was learned that he was the assistant commandant of Dachau. His suicide
attempt didn't work. We heard no more about him but presume that he was
tried in War Crimes Court.

After we were detached from the 45th Division and returned to our battalion,
we went back to 'business as usual,' still always ready to engage the enemy.
The Germans offered just enough resistance to keep us alert!

One miserable overcast rainy day, we were attacked by an American P-47
Thunderbolt fighter plane with German markings. It was flying low and
seemed to be losing altitude. Everyone fired at it with something, be it rifle,
pistol, or machine gun but when it hit the ground, we did not know if we had
shot it down or if it just ran out of fuel. It came down without lowering the
landing gear but was still intact except for a bent propeller and damaged
undercarriage. Our tank crew was first to the downed plane. The pilot was
dead. He was wearing a st!ange combination of clothes: nothing matched, and
his attire was not a uniform. He had no identification, not even dog tags. Some
American air bases in the north had been captured by the Germans a few weeks
earlier, and very likely the plane came from one of those bases. We reported
the incident to a higher echelon of command, but we never heard anything
more of either the plane or its pilot.

Rumors concerning the cessation of hostilities began to circulate in early May.
Nonetheless, we remained in combat readiness, albeit somewhat sloppily. At
last we got word that the War was over. Officially it ended on May 8, 1945.
For one or two days after that we acted as if the War were still on. We were
not sure that the enemy knew the War was over, and we did not want to be
caught unprepared by some overzealous or unaware Germans.

Finally we were able to relax and proceed to our occupation assignment.

After offering prayers of thanks and breathing sighs of relief, we speculated
about the future. Who would go home first? Would any of us have to serve in
the Pacific?

Answers to these and many other questions would come soon enough. For the
time being each of us lived in a state of euphoria, for each had his private
thoughts about what he had done and what he had left to do.

Chapter XIII: Occupation Duty, Toging and Furstenfeldbruck

He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth. (Psalm 46:9, KJV)

After the War ended, American troops became an Army of Occupation with few
exceptions. Soldiers who had been in Europe a very short time were sent to the
Pacific Theater, and soldiers who had been in Europe a very long time were
sent home. All German cities and most German villages were occupied by
American forces.

My first occupational duty was in the town of Toging, a pleasant Bavarian
village about forty miles east of Munich. Headquarters Company of the 25th
Tank Battalion was the main unit in the town, although some troops from
A Company were stationed there as well. The town was untouched by the War
because it was of no strategic significance, i.e. it had no factories, rail yards, or
munitions depots. Toging was divided into three distinct districts. The main
section of town included the business district and the churches and schools.
The lower part of town at the bottom of a steep hill directly off the main street
was mostly residential. Located just north of the main part of town was
a group of small houses that were dwellings of a special kind.

The main part of town had two churches, Catholic and Lutheran. The Catholic
church had an onion dome, and the Lutheran church a spire -- the usual
pattern of church architecture in Bavaria and Austria.

When we arrived, many of the business places were open. Among them were
a grocery store, a barber shop, and a shoe repair. The shoe repair deserves
especial mention because many American officers had boots made to order by
the cobbler. We had only our combat boots, and everyone wanted something
a little nicer. The boots that the Toging cobbler made were good-looking and
comfortable. I am sure he charged nothing but was usually given something.
Items most in demand by the German people were sugar, coffee, and cigarettes.
I do not recall seeing any enlisted men having boots made. I had a pair of plain
brown dress oxfords that my parents sent me while I was still in the States.
I had carried them in my duffel bag all through Europe.

A small tributary to the Inn River ran through the lower town. We took our
tank there to wash it, much as one would take his car to a car wash.
A Displaced Persons camp.J ay adjacent to our tank-washing spot. Displaced
Persons were people who had escaped or had been released from concentration
camps and people who had to flee from their homes because of the War. The
United States Army was trying to help them, but organizing such a massive
effort is complex and slow. We soldiers tried to help them by bringing them
whatever we could, but individual efforts were not enough. The plight of DPs
in central Europe in the summer of 1945 was sad and even desperate. The
Marshall Plan eventually corrected much of the hardship, but it was not
implemented until the middle of 1947.

The third part of the town was a group of small cottages close to our quarters.
We thought they were residences for townspeople until we learned that they
had been built to house young women of good Aryan stock who were then
mated with Aryan men, usually servicemen, in a selective genetic way. The
village was one of Hitler's baby farms. Hitler frequently spoke of the Germans
as the master race, and his selective breeding program was established to
enhance the purity of Aryan stock. At War's end the women stayed in the
houses because they did not know where else to go. Most Gls viewed the whole
setup with revulsion.

We lived in Toging's mam school, probably a gymnasmm. (The word
Gymnasium in the German educational system is a high school for students
aspiring to enter a university, not a place for holding athletic events.) Our
quarters were comfortable, but the sleeping arrangements were not very good.
We slept directly on plywood, for the beds were without springs and
mattresses. Admittedly, plywood was better than the ground or the floor of
a tank, but we had hoped for something better. During the fighting we
frequently slept on soft beds in homes, and now that the War was over we had
to sleep on hard surfaces. 'Hardly seemed right!'

Special Services supplied us with things like sporting equipment and books.
We had only one radio for several rooms. I decided to remedy the situation by
running wires from the radio to satellite speakers. I found wires and speakers
somewhere in the building. I did the first speaker easily and was working on
the next connection with both the radio and second satellite speaker turned on.
Working on a radio plugged into the wall outlet was a big mistakeI I got
zapped. I forgot that Europe uses a 220-volt power system. I was not hurt, but
I did no more 'hot' wiring after that!

Much of the school equipment was still in the building, including a piano in
the main hall. There were several people in our unit who could play. Their
music was a real morale boost! We knew no popular songs, but the radio
helped us learn them. Armed Forces Radio had good programs, and the piano
players would listen and pick up the tunes of the day. We had been out of
touch for a long time, but it didn't take long for us to catch up with the rest of
the world.

The town had some well-kept tennis courts on which Dick Keskey and I played
almost daily. Special Services issued us the equipment we needed. I wanted to
play baseball, but there was no Special Services organization for baseball in
early May. Leagues were formed later, however, and I did get to play some. By
autumn the Occupation Army had 'settled in,' and football was well
organized.
(Footnote 1: I hoped that George Johnson enjoyed using the football that he got out of the tank in
Gertwiller. He risked his very life for it!

There was a stable with riding horses near our quarters. T.D. White, the
former first sergeant in our company, had been in the cavalry since the 1930s,
before the cavalry was mechanized. Because he was familiar with horses, he
became the self-appointed riding academy head. I had never ridden much, but
I caught on quickly and had a great deal of fun riding through the nearby
forests. I never rode alone because I was still uneasy around horses, even
though these were quite docile. The fellows with whom I rode were probably
no more experienced than I.

The road to the open country and woods where
we liked to ride took us through the village north of town. Many of the women
living in the enclave described above would come to their front gates, smile,
and wave. They didn't seem to be particularly provocative -- just friendly.

Obtaining booze was a matter of concern to enlisted men. The officers had
a monthly ration of spirits, but enlisted men had only a monthly ration of beer
-- no hard liquor. The most available spirits were Hennesey brandy and
Calvados. Calvados is an apple brandy that packs a wallop. One day Cpl.
White, our erstwhile stable-master and horse authority, drank too much
Calvados and tried to saddle a particularly stubborn horse. After
much struggling, he got the -saddle part-way on, tried to mount the animal, slid
off, and held onto the horse's tail. The horse broke out of the stable and took
off down the street with T.D. hanging on for dear life. Unfortunately nobody
had a camera handy.
(Footnote 2 & 4: T.D. had no Christian name, only initials.

T.D. White, originally from the back hills of Kentucky, joined the Army during the Thirties.
All but illiterate, he could write just well enough to file daily reports. With diligence he rose
to the rank of first sergeant in the Regular Army. When the War made it imperative that any
officer, commissioned or non-commissioned, be able to read and write, T.D. was made
a private. According to the rules, he could have asked for a transfer, but he chose to stay with
his unit -- and rose to the rank of corporal.
(Footnote 3: One star, two star, or three star -- the more stars, the better the brandy!

The Army instituted a non-fraternization policy as soon as we entered Germany.
It mattered little from the time we came into the country until the end of
hostilities on May 8: we had neither the opportunity nor the desire to fraternize
with the locals during the fighting. However, after the War was over, there
was a natural tendency to socialize with the people. The Army's fraternization
ban was very strict. We were not to associate with the Germans at all. Penalty
for violation of the ban was a $64.00 fine and possible court martial, though
I never heard of any soldier who was fined -- much less court martialed. The
ban, very difficult to enforce, was eventually dropped -- but for now it was still
in effect!

The Army was quite concerned about morale. A sightseeing trip to Innsbruck,
Austria, was arranged not long after our arrival in Toging. About fifteen of us
went. We traveled by truck -- not the most comfortable way to go, but there were no first-class tour companies in 1945. The trip was pleasant. We stopped several
times along the way.


The first stop was by a small collection of beautiful half-timbered chalet-like
houses. I engaged a middk-aged man in small talk, thus risking the penalties
of the fraternization ban. His was the first protestation of innocence I heard.
He insisted that he had never agreed with the Nazis, that his neighbor might
even have been a party member, but he certainly was notI The man asked me
a strange question: he wanted to know why the American Army had not kept
right on marching east when the War ended. He said that we would have to
fight the Russians someday,. and if we did it immediately, we could use the
remnant of the German Army. Besides, we already had a large force on the
European continent.

Another stop was at a rest area, hardly more than a wide spot in the road.
There I saw the first of many mountain shrines, a figure of Mary in a small
chapel-like construction mounted on a post. The little chapel was about the
size of a large birdhouse. I saw many more shrines along mountain paths and
roads during the occupation and again years later on trips to Switzerland,
Germany, and Austria. Near the end of the day we dropped out of the
mountains into the valley of the Inn River. There was an airfield on the valley
floor, where many jet fighters were parked on the airstrip. We were told that
the airplanes had been there for a long time just parked because the
Germans had no jet fuel. (Thank goodness!)

We had sleeping bags and slept in a school. After a supper of rations that we
brought with us, we settled in for the night. We passed the time with poker
games and bull sessions.

The next morning we were in Innsbruck, a beautiful city in an Alpine setting.
Innsbruck suffered very little bombing damage, so we felt like pre-War
tourists.

I took off with two other fellows. The first street that we came to was
Innsbruck's famous Maria Theresienstrasse. There we saw the classic 'postcard'
view of the city with the Alps in the background. We visited the Hofkirche, the
imperial church, built as a mausoleum for Emperor Maximilian but used as the
burial place for many other Austrian monarchs as well. Next we saw the
famous Golden Roof in a small baroque square. None of us knew very much
about Innsbruck, either its history or its geography. We just happened to
stumble onto places that are famous. The city had trolley service, so getting
around was easy.

After lunch several of us walked to the cog railway. The trains had inclined
seats to allow passengers to -remain upright during the steep ascent. We rode
the railway about half-way up the mountain, then caught a cable car that took
us up to a very nice lodge and restaurant. There was also a ski hut where we
paid no rent for use of skis, poles, and boots because we were wearing
American uniforms. The fellow running the ski hut was most accommodating.
Very likely he was an ex-German soldier and just a little frightened. Several
lifts were running, and we had a great afternoon of skiing. Unfortunately, in
all our playing around, we missed the last cable car going down the mountain
and had to walk to the cog railway, take it to the city, and then find our way to
our sleeping quarters. We didn't get back until early evening. It was almost
dark.

After the Innsbruck trip everyone felt less hesitant about going to new places.
There was little we had to do. The officers led us through the motions of
military life -- drill, calisthenics, etc. -- but without much enthusiasm. ~t was
easy to get a Jeep, so I used one to visit friends in neighboring towns and did
some general looking around at the countryside.

The nearest town to the west was Muhldorf on the Inn River. It was larger
than Toging and had some industry. There was a waterfalls in the river and
a power plant nearby, where an American aluminum company owned a branch
factory. According to the local point of view, the plant was never bombed
because the Air Force had been instructed to spare the plant in order to protect
American investment.

Other units of the 14th Armored Division were stationed at Neuotting and
Altotting, two nearby towns. I visited both of them several times, mostly out of
curiosity.

Of all the towns close to Toging, Burghausen was the most fascinating. The
town is located on the Sal~ach River, which forms part of the boundary
between Germany and Austria. Burghausen is perched on a narrow ridge
about one-kilometer-long. It is famous as the site of one of the oldest and
largest feudal castles in Germany. Harvey Sabinson was stationed in
Burghausen, and I went to see him at my first opportunity. Harvey's quarters
were in the castle. He was the most junior of all the officers in his unit, so his
accommodations were the least desirable. He even slept on the floor. One
would think that he could have found a bed somewhere in the largest castle in
Germany. Harvey showed me around the castle, which was very interesting,
but I found the town itself even more engaging. The lower section, situated on
the river, had a very beautiful town square as its center. Many of the buildings
were covered with colorful murals. The Catholic church was topped with the
largest onion dome I had ever seen. In the lower town we saw an American
Jeep with two sergeants and two local girls heading for a bridge over the
river -- the most open and flagrant violation of the fraternization ban one
could imagine!

On another occasion Harvey and I drove down to Wasserburg, a nice Bavarian
town southwest of our general locale. First we went out into a nearby woods
to do a little target practice with a .45-caliber pistol I was carrying. The noise
probably scared the local populace.

Some Wasserberg girls were entertaining several big American soldiers m
a social hall. The fraternization ban was still in effect and presumably a real
threat. Still the Gis acted unaware of its restrictions. Even Harvey, an officer
who should have turned them into the Military Police, failed to scare them.
Harvey and I did not like the situation, so we left in a hurry.

In the first weeks after the end of the War, the men in the Occupation Army
were nervous about the German people and the possibility of scorched earth
incidences.
(Footnote 6: The term scorched earth refers to the practice of destroying one's own facilities in order to
prevent the opposition from getting or using them. The expression burning your bridges
behind you comes from the same source.


We were especially concerned some die-hard Nazis might blow
up a small power plant in our area. Two other soldiers and I were sent to look
it over and guard it for a few days. We traveled light. The three of us went in
one Jeep; we took only sleeping bags, food for a few days, and some personal
effects. The plant was steam-powered. It was in perfect condition but not
being used at all. On the first afternoon at the site, I walked to a village about
a half-mile away. I was the only American around, so I thought it highly
unlikely that I would be caught fraternizing. It was a hot day, so I went to the
only tavern in town to get a beer. The beer was a little watery, but it tasted
good. Some older men were playing cards. I asked one old fellow if he played
sixty-six. He did, indeed! We played a few games, but I don't remember who
won. I returned to the town several times, played some more cards, and drank
some more beer. Eventually we three Gls went back to our unit. The power
plant never seemed to be in any danger.
(Footnote 7: I thought I would never again have to eat field rations!

(Footnote 8: Sixty-six is a game derived from pinochle, which became popular in German communities.
Most couples have a favorite two-handed game, and my parents especially enjoyed sixty-six.
I learned it from watching them play. I was only guessing that the tavern habitues would
know the game.

We had a lot of free time, so I visited many local places. On one of the outings,
several of my friends and I went to Munich. I had passed through the outskirts
of the city during the last days of the War but certainly did no sightseeing. We
had no guide book, and we had no idea of what to look for. The first thing
we stumbled onto was a museum on an island in the Isar River. The museum is
not the city's main museum; it is devoted only to science and technology.
Among the other things we saw were some airplanes parked at the main
Munich airport. One airplane had a propeller at both its front and its rear.
None of us had ever seen anything like it before. We called it a pusher-puller
airplane. Many years later, I read about that very plane in a magazine devoted
to World War II military aircraft.

I made another trip to Munich about the same time for a reason other than
sight-seeing. One morning several us were called in to Company Headquarters.
One of the fellows thought we were to be reprimanded. Instead we were told
to go to Munich in dress uniform for a medals presentation ceremony. There
was to be lots of brass and a real 'spit and polish' parade on the Munich
parade grounds. We got into dress uniforms quickly and reported to the truck
that was to take us. The ceremony was scheduled for the afternoon. The driver
dropped us at a building near the parade grounds, where we ate lunch. From
there we went directly to the grounds. The ceremony was in conjunction with
a review for Gen. Patton and other brass. The awards part of the program came
early, so we did not have to stand at attention very long. There were to be
many recipients of decorations, so the day promised to be endless.

But everything moved along very well. Only the citations for the highest
decorations were read. Gen. Patton pinned some of the medals himself.
I happened to be in the row he came down, so he pinned a Silver Star on me.
He said nothing, but his aide congratulated everyone singly.
So I saw the great man up close again.
(Footnote 9: I had seen Gen. Patton in Reidheim when he insisted that we remove sand bags from the sides
of our tanks. See Chapter VI, Baptism of Fire.

Very soon after the end of the War, probably in the middle of May, 1945, I was
sent to be interviewed by a selection board for admission to Officer Candidate
School. I had already turned down a battlefield commission, so it should have
seemed unlikely to the board that I would want to go to OCS. The War in the
Pacific was not over, and the possibility of being sent there was not very
appealing.

The interviews were held in a building on the Starnberger See [Starnberg Lake],
a resort not far from Munich. There could be only one interview at a time, so
those of us waiting in line got to enjoy the surroundings. Some of us took
rowboats out onto the lake and did whatever else we could do to pass the time.
I was accepted into OCS, but I chose not to go for reasons I have already
mentioned. I knew before I went that I would turn down an appointment
should I get one, but I liked the excitement of challenge. Besides, a day at
Starnberger See was good incentive for going to the interview. The OCS was in
very nice surroundings in Fontainbleau, near Paris.
(Footnote 10: Fontainbleau is the site of a famous palace, which is said to be more beautiful and
interesting than the palace at Versailles. Ruth and I visited Versailles in May, 1995, but did
not get to Fontainbleau.


The Army announced the point system sometime in early summer. Each soldier
was assigned points according to his length of service, his service medals, and
his citations. One point was awarded for each month of service in the United
States, two points for each month of overseas service, five points for each
campaign medal or citation, etc. The required number of points for discharge
when the system was first announced was very high. Men with very few points
were sent to the Pacific Theater. Those in the middle stayed in Europe on
occupation duty. I was in the middle category and considered myself lucky.
I could not go home, but I would not be sent to fight the Japanese either. It
turned out that the really fortunate men were the ones who were sent home for
furloughs before being sent to the Pacific Theater and just happened to be in
the United States on August 14, 1945, when the War ended. None of them was
sent on, and they received early discharges.

When the point system went into effect, men were reassigned to different units.
Membership in a unit was determined by points, not by military skills. Before
I was sent home, I was assigned to two independent tank battalions and
a corps artillery battalion.
(Footnote 11: Not belonging to a specific armored division, such as the 25th.


Before the breakup of the battalion, we made several moves as a unit. The first
was to a village near Fiirstenfeldbruck. We were housed in a castle, but it
wasn't very romantic. The place had never been much and was run down. In
another day it may have been owned by someone of lesser nobility. It had an
inner court where the battalion parked some of its smaller vehicles. The second
floor had a balcony around the entire court, and our rooms were off the
balcony -- like a motel.

Sometime on the way to Furstenfeldbruck, our tank column went through the
Munich town square with its famous Glockenspiel clock tower. We passed
many other tourist sights in Munich, but most of us did not realize their
significance.

About that time we picked up some new fellows. They had been in the village
for a time, and we sort of inherited them. One fellow, a guy named Frank,
stands out in my mind. He was good at dodging work. He had been overseas
quite awhile but had managed to avoid front-line duty. His time in Europe was
much like that of Eddie Slovik, but he escaped Slovik's fate. The story he told
was that he had to stay in the Army because he had a murder rap waiting for
him when he got out. Frank said that he had been in a fight over a woman
with a man in an alley of a southern town and stabbed him. He also said that
he had two wives, one in the States and one in the village. He was the company
barber. Barbers are known to talk a lot, so we all wondered how much of his
banter was just that -- talk! Then he was caught stealing and cheating at
poker. After that we kept our distance. Frank seemed like a nice guy on the
outside. Someone said of him, "He'd give you the shirt off his back -- and steal
it back that night." I had been in the Army long enough to avoid characters
like him.
(Footnote 12: Eddie Slovik was the only American soldier to be executed for desertion since the Civil War.
He was executed in January, 1945, in the Vosges mountain town of St. Marie aux Mines. His
story is told in The Execution of Private Slovik, a book by William Bradford Huie. Martin
Sheen starred in a movie made from the book.


The combat veterans of the 25th who were still in the battalion had a special
bond, almost like family. Frank's boasting of avoiding combat did not go over
the way he thought it would, and he soon learned to shut up or risk more than
just a bloody nose.

One day I decided to treat myself to something new to me, a shave by a barber.
I certainly did not want to go to Frank, so I went into the village. The town had
only one barber, a quiet fellow about forty years old. I was alone. The shop
was empty when I entered, so I was taken immediately. I had no time to think
about what I was doing. After I sat down I realized that the barber might well
have been a German soldier, perhaps even a member of the SS. We talked a bit,
but I learned little about him. When he took the razor to my neck, I wondered
if I should jump up and get out of there. He might have been a fanatic. Putting
a razor to a GI's jugular vein would be very easy. I did not leave, and I got my
shave. It cost about fifteen cents. One day I met the barber in the street. We
exchanged pleasantries, and he asked me to come back for a haircut and shave
on the house. I never went back. Maybe I should have. He didn't have much
business.

We did not stay in Furstenfeldbruck very long. The whole unit was ordered to
move down into the Alps. We didn't know just where we were headed, but we
prepared to go at a moment's notice.

Chapter XIV: Occupation Duty, Bad Reichenhall

The battalion -- with all of its tanks, half-tracks, etc. -- was ordered to move.
For me the transfer would be my last involving equipment. All later changes
would affect only people, their orders governed by their points towards
discharge.

My remaining time in Europe was spent in the Bavarian Alps. I could not have
asked for better assignments. The scenery was beautiful, and the weather was
great. There were so many things to do -- especially for a Midwesterner like
me! My occupation duties were light, and I had a lot of free time. I frequently
refer to my months in Bavaria as my 'salad days.'

Our convoy left Furstenfeldbruck early one beautiful summer day. We traveled
the famous Autobahn most of the way towards our destination. The trip was an
all-day trek, so each member of our tank crew took a turn at driving. The other
four riders were strangers to me, but we got along fine. I was a little
apprehensive when I had to drive because my experience navigating a tank was
pretty much limited to guiding one around a parking lot in the States. An M-4
tank has a conventional multi-speed (five forward and two reverse) transmission. Steering is done with two
brake levers called radials. Pulling on one of the radials applies a brake to its
track. The braking action turns the tank in the direction of the pulled radial,
much the way dragging one's foot turns a sled.

With that bit of background you can well understand my misadventure while
driving. At first everything went just fine. I did not make a jerky start, and
I did not grind the gears. I cruised along in the top gear at about twenty-five
miles an hour. Then the column of vehicles came to a blown-out bridge over
a gully with steep sides. Rather than look for a detour, our convoy leader
elected to go down one bank and come back up the other. All the vehicles
ahead of our tank managed to execute that maneuver easily, so I didn't
anticipate any trouble. As soon a·s I started down the slope, however, I realized
that I was going much too fast. I had to shift into a lower gear. I managed to
get into third gear, but third gear was not low enough. We were still going too
fast, and I could not shift any lower. I tried to double-clutch and shift down,
but I simply could not. There was nothing left to do but to apply brakes. That
meant pulling on both radials at once -- HARD! I stood up, wrapped both arms
around the radials, and pulled as best I could. We slowed down just enough to
avoid complete disaster at the bottom of the ravine. By grinding away in first
gear I managed to make the climb up the other side -- all of it without any of
the other guys in the tank ever knowing anything was wrong. They just
thought I went down the hill a little fast. I came to have a much greater
appreciation for tank drivers!

When we had gone about a third of the way, we could see the Alps in the
distance. On one of the snapshots taken that afternoon, I look as if I were
leaning against a mountain. Unfortunately the picture is lost, its place in the
family album only an empty space.

Individual vehicles had no maps, so our crew could not identify terrain
features. Near the end of the trip we passed Chiemsee, a large German lake
made famous by Mad King Ludwig of Bavaria. Ludwig built a palace on
Herreninsel, an island near the lake's south shore. The palace, which he named
Herrenchiemsee, was meant to be a replica of the palace at Versailles. None of
us knew anything of the history of the place: we didn't even know the name
of the lake!

Shortly after passing Chiemsee, we left the Autobahn and headed south into the
mountains. I think there were more blown bridges and our move into the Alps
was a detour. The road was narrow and winding. I was no longer driving, so
I just sat on the turret and enjoyed the scenery. We passed Thumsee, another
lovely mountain lake.

I just had to return to that lovely setting! I managed to get back to it several days later. My
cut-off fatigue pants served as swimming trunks, and I used a log mountain lodge on the shore
to change clothes.


In early evening we reached Bad Reichenhall, a delightful Alpine town near the
Austrian border. There we took over German Army barracks at the edge of
town. The first night each of us found a cot, cleaned up, and went to bed. The
next day we were assigned quarters. We were now in the 191st Tank Battalion,
still an armored outfit, under the command of Colonel Wellborn Dolvin.
I was a sergeant and had easy duty. The 191st had some new Pershing tanks,
which mounted 90mm guns. We wanted to see the cannons fired, so out
of mere curiosity I took a group of men to a clearing. We fired a few rounds of
live ammunition, but none of us wanted to ride a tank into battle again -- ever!
(Footnote 3: In November, 1995, Ruth and I attended an Elderhostel at Paris Landing State Park,
Tennessee. One of the topics, World War 14 was taught by Dr. Malcom Muir, a distant
relative of the naturalist John Muir. Dr. Muir quoted Col. Dolvin in one of his lectures. I told
the group that I had known Col. Dolvin and admired him very much.


The 191st was a veteran outfit with more combat time than the 25th. The men
had fought in Italy, France, and Germany. The battalion had a fascinating
character, a small Polish man, who enjoyed the battalion commander's special
favor. He existed by his wits as he knocked about Europe throughout the entire
War. I never heard him called anything but Jan. He may have been a prisoner
of the Germans at one time. At least he said he was, but we never knew when
Jan was telling the truth. Somewhere in France or Germany he attached
himself to the 191st. Col. Dolvin was a romantic sort. He may have considered
Jan a latter-day cavalry scout -- like the heroes frequently depicted in western
movies about the Civil War or fights with the Indians. Jan knew just enough
English words to communicate. His clothing was nondescript: his only
recognizable clothes were his pants and a field jacket, both of which were
US Army issue.

Members of the battalion frequently told of Jan's exploits, for he acted as the
eyes and ears of the outfit. He worked closely with the Intelligence and
Reconnaissance Platoon, but he could move about more freely in enemy
territory than Americans. On one occasion he failed to return from a scouting
m1ss1on. Col. Dolvin committed the entire battalion to rescuing Jan. From
a purely tactical point of view, the action was ridiculous. Fortunately there
were no casualties. Had there been any and had the object of the mission been
learned by his superiors, the Colonel would have been in deep trouble!

Jan was a womanizer: he seemed to have a woman friend in every town. He
scrounged coffee, tea, and sugar in small amounts from the kitchen and
collected whatever cigarettes he could to help him impress his lady friends. He
had no visible source of income. Perhaps Col. Dolvin paid him out of his own
pocket for the many times Jan helped the battalion.

There remained a small contingent of Germans in Bad Reichenhal when we
arrived. The major in cha:cge of the German troops had a handsome German
shepherd dog. Corporal John Curran had been Jeep driver for Col. Watson,
battalion commander of the 25th. Because of his job, John got to meet people
and go places that the rest of us enlisted men did not. He was similarly
privileged in his new battalion. He met the officer with the dog, appropriated
the dog, and assured the German that he would take good care of him. The
major gave John instruction on how to handle the dog, what to feed him, etc.
John must have been very good with animals because the dog obeyed him
immediately and never caused any problems. I personally was always afraid of
the animal: the reputation of the breed alone would have prevented my taking
charge of him. The dog became the battalion mascot.

Lieut. Martin had become company commander of A Company during the
fighting. His point count put him into the 191 st Battalion, and he and I were
assigned to the same company. I was glad to see him again. We understood
eac~ other, and I liked him a lot. As noted earlier, Lieut. Martin was gung ho
in battle, and he was no less so in occupational duty. One of the first things he
did in his new job was to organize a long hike, which turned out to be more
like a climb. Bad Reichenhall is in the Alps, and Lieut. Martin's 'hike' went
right up one of the mountains. There was a lot of complaining, of course, but
when his men got to the top, one and all were glad to have come. Standing on
a mountain top is an exhilarating experience, but for 'flatlanders' -- which is
what most of us were -- it was especially grand!

I loved the mountains! One especially adventuresome thing I did very early in
my Bad Reichenhall stay was to ride the cable car up to the Predigstuhle
[Bishop's Chair]. The lower terminal of the cable car was at the edge of town.
When I arrived at the base of the mountain, I asked the cable car operator if
there had ever been an accident. I expected him to say No. Instead he said the
last incident had been in 'whatever year.' He was probably just teasing, but we
approached the venture a little more soberly, and one of the fellows would not
get into the car at all.

The ride to the top was a real thrill. On the way up I saw a chamois. My dad
always polished his car with a chamois skin, so I just assumed chamois skin
came from a Coast-to-Coast hardware store. The view from the Predigstuhle is
fantastic. I could look straight down the back of the mountain and see the
glistening Thumsee.
(Footnote 4: The cable car and the views at the Predigstuhle are much like the ones at Copper Mountain
in Banff.

I frequently went to the Red Cross club when I had free time. (I wonder how
many Red Cross club coffees and doughnuts I consumed.) The club was in
a building that had been a culture center, so it housed both an art museum and
a concert hall. It was located at one end of a beautiful and well-maintained
city park. At the other end of the park was a band shell. On weekends the city
orchestra gave concerts. Very few of the local citizenry but many American
soldiers attended them. I went frequently. Hearing a concert was a nice way to
spend a Sunday afternoon.
(Footnote 5: When I go to a doughnut shop such as Winchell's with grandchildren, I sometimes order
a plain cake doughnut like the Red Cross ones for 'old time's sake.'


After the fraternization ban was lifted, the local
people came more often. On one especially nice summer afternoon, I was at
the Red Cross club while waiting for the concert to begin. A young and comely
German girl walked across the park and sat down on a bench near the band
shell. Several of the Gis, myself included, admired her from a distance and
speculated on chances of getting acquainted and taking her to the concert.
I decided to approach her -- but got no farther than a few feet into the park
when a first lieutenant came by. They went off together -- and not to the
concert! The brass had a big advantage socially.

Bad Reichenhall bore few marks of the War. It had nothing of strategic
importance, so Allied bombers passed it by. The downtown area was clean and
pretty, and many of the businesses were open. The camera shop was very
popular because it carried German film and camera equipment. Our own Post
Exchange did not yet have much film. Like most of the local business people,
the storekeeper accepted cigarettes, sugar, or coffee in exchange for his goods.

I went to Salzburg the first chance I had. I knew nothing about the city, but
I learned a lot quickly. For one thing, Mozart was born there -- but I did not
visit his birthplace because it and other tourist attractions had not reopened
since the War's end. In August I attended several concerts in the first post-War
Salzburg Music Festival. I was unaware that I was attending a world-famous
event -- like seeing the Olympic Games or the World Series. I kept two of the
programs, which may be seen Appendix F.

On August 20, the program in the
Felsenreitschule included three Mozart pieces and one by Haydn. The next
night, the concert in the Festspielhaus featured the music of Beethoven and
Mozart. I recognized the Festspielhaus immediately when I saw the movie
version of The Sound of Music. The talent show in one of the last scenes was
filmed there.

I also attended a United Service Organization presentation in the Mozarteum,
another of the Music Festival halls. The USO troupe consisted of only a few
people, but they were talented and versatile. A male soloist sang You'll Never
Walk Alone from Carousel, and I was enthralledI The musical opened on
Broadway in 1945, so we were hearing songs from a really new show!

I especially liked the Mirabell Gardens in Salzburg. The Mozarteum and a very
fine baroque church are situated adjacent to the gardens. At one time the city
was ruled by the Bishop of Salzburg. His role was both religious and political.
Legend says that one of the bishops was a huge man. Because of his size, he
had to be carried about on a chaise borne by four servants. He conducted mass
from a semi-prone position. Although the edifice in the Mirabell Gardens is
not a cathedral, it was still one of the bishop's favorite churches. He had an art
glass window installed in the ceiling above the chancel, so he could look at it
while lying down.

I attended another USO show in Traunstein, a town about twenty miles from
Bad Reichenhall. The headliners were Jack Benny (comedian and emcee), Larry
Adler (harmonica virtuoso), and Martha Tilton (female vocalist). I managed to
get a Jeep to transport three of us to the show. The performers were very fine,
but maybe any live presentation would have seemed good to an audience
of entertainment-starved soldiers.
(Footnote 6: In 1980, I attended another show in Traunstein. It was certainly different from the first one.
Ruth and I were on a tour that included the Oberammergau Passion Play. Because
Oberammergau and Traunstein are not far from each other, we stayed in Traunstein the night
before the play. (The date just happened to be August 14, Ruth's birthday.) That evening we
attended a beer fest in a huge tent.

Everyone was in a happy mood at first. There were
a Lederhosen-clad oompah band, bar maids serving good local beer in pint steins, and all the
other trappings that make the German Fasching and Oktoberfest such entertaining festivals.
Then, a little later, the crowd began to sway in rhythm.

The movement became mesmerizing
until we sensed a strong suggestion of nationalism that was supposed to have died with the
end of the War. We found the scene both eerie and scary.

Salzburg is famous for another summer festival, the annual presentation of
Jederman, a play by the Austrian poet and playwright Hugo von
Hofmannsthal. I didn't get to see an actual performance, but I did happen
onto the square at the right time to watch a rehearsal.
(Footnote 7: von Hofmannsthal is probably better known for his stories Ariadne auf Naxos and Der
Kosenkavalier, both of which were made into operas by Richard Strauss.

Eventually I learned something of local geography. One Saturday, Gordon
Elrod, Dave Hardin, and I drove a Jeep to Berchtesgaden, the town closest to
Hitler's mountain retreat. Gordon and Dave were from Indiana and Texas
respectively, so none of us had experience in mountain driving. We drove very
slowly and carefully. The road to the Berghof, Hitler's home, had a 15% grade,
and part of it was one-way. Military Police at the base of the hill cautioned us
before we began our climb. The Berghof itself was badly damaged, but the
balcony overlooking the Alps looked safe enough for us to walk on. We had
our pictures taken there as each of us assumed a German -Sieg HeiF pose. Our
picture is still in a Kratzke family album. We wanted to go up to the Eagle's
Nest, a tea garden on Mount Kehlstein, but the elevator was closed.
(When the elevator first resumed operation, only staff grade officers were
allowed to use it until a group of dignitaries, including Gen. Eisenhower,
wanted to ride in it. When the General saw the discriminatory sign, he took it
down, and afterwards anyone could go up to the Eagle's Nest on the elevator.)
(Footnote 8: I did not visit the Eagle's Nest until 1989.

From the Berghof we went out to Konigssee [King's Lake], the Alpine lake
twelve miles south of town. We took the excursion boat out to St. Bartholoma
Church, the subject of many paintings. The boats, which are still in operation
today, are very quiet because they are electrically run.
Rumors about the possible ending of the War in the Pacific began to circulate
in early August. News of dropping the atomic bomb, the new super-weapon,
onto Hiroshima and Nagasaki was greeted with enthusiasm. We assumed that
the bombings would end the War and that none of us would have to fight in
the Pacific. Hostilities actually ended on V-J Day, August 14, 1945, and the
War in the Pacific ended officially on September 2.
(Footnote 9: One such painting is in the permanent collection of the Frye Art Museum in Seattle.

I played some baseball that summer. The games were not very well organized,
and our equipment was minimal. We had fun, but I still missed participating
in the regular sporting activities I enjoyed before the War.
Sometime in the autumn, I learned via the grapevine that there was
a Missouri Synod Lutheran chaplain stationed at Nurnberg. I contacted him
and asked if he would come to Bad Reichenhall and hold a communion service
for me and anyone else I could round up. I had not been to communion since
I left the United States, so I was especially pleased when he agreed to come.
I found only one other Lutheran GI who wanted to join me. The chaplain held
a short service for just the two of us in the Lutheran church across the street
from the Red Cross club. I am not certain as to the chaplain's identity, but
I think he was The Rev. Carl Eggers, 10 our pastor at Christ the King from 1958
until 1964.
(Footnote 10: 10 Pastor Eggers served as one of the Protestant chaplains to the German prisoners at the War
Crimes Trials in Nurnberg. The Bellevue newspaper had a feature story on Pastor Eggers
when he was at Christ the King.

In early autumn, the girls of the Red Cross organized a party. There was no
excuse or special occasion, but a party seemed like a good idea. The
fraternization ban had been eased, so some of the fellows invited local girls. It
was a Bring-Your-Own-Bottle party, so there was a scramble to find liquor
sources. Most of the guys who came brought Hennessy brandy. Some fellow in
my barracks, whose name I have forgotten, asked me if I would share the cost
of a bottle of whatever he could find. I said I would, even though I knew very
little about spirits. Somewhere he managed to buy a liter of Cointreau. It
didn't cost much, and we would not have to go to the party empty-handed. We
didn't know that Cointreau is an orange liqueur, sweet and thick. It is a very
good, actually quite expensive, but hardly a party drink. Each of us drank only
a little of it, but in time we used up the bottle's contents -- most of it as a treat
to other guys.

Liquor was difficult to come by and much in demand. Even after the War, only
officers were allowed regular rations of good spirits. Enlisted men got beer.
Someone learned of a good source of fine whiskey and brandy in Bolzano, Italy.
Bolzano is located on the Austrian-Italian border not far from Brenner Pass,
close enough to make a trip there feasible. We found a GI volunteer to drive
a truck to Bolzano and bring back a whole load of booze. We gave him enough
money and barter material -- mostly cigarettes -- to deal with whoever had the
hooch. He took off, as thirsty enlisted men awaited his return in great
anticipation. But he didn't return when expected. After waiting for what
seemed a long time, we sent out a search party, including an MP, to Bolzano to
find out what happened. We were worried that our booze buyer may have
been hi-jacked. But he did not meet such a fate. Instead he had sold the truck,
kept the money and barter materials, and settled down with a Bolzano family
who took him in. The search party retrieved the truck and most of the money,
bought the liquor, and brought the errant messenger back under arrest. The
whole operation was only marginally legal in the first place, so there was a lot
of eye-winking as the guy got off with a demotion and pledge to compensate all
money spent.

Some of the fellows had liquor sent them by friends or relatives -- more
difficult than it sounds! In an effort to prevent smuggling, the Army Post
Office in New York examined all outgoing packages. The Army suspected that
some soldiers would be involved in black market booze, and smuggling through
the mails would be one way of obtaining goods for sale. The incidents that
I knew about had nothing to do with smuggling for profit. The individuals
involved just wanted to get some whiskey for themselves.

Dave Hardin received a package from his sister. It contained a well-padded
quart fruit jar full of cherries. The jar had a home-made label that identified
the contents, the date of canning, and the person who did the canning. Dave
did not care for the juice in the which the cherries were preserved, so he
poured it out. Upon sampling the cherries, he immediately recognized
a non-cherry taste. His sister had replaced the cherry juice with Bourbon, and
it had gotten past the Army inspectors in New York. Dave was annoyed that his
sister had not alerted him to expect some very good cherries!
(Footnote 11: There was no styrofoam in 1945; something called excelsior was used as packing material.

Another one of the fellows got a loaf of bread that had been cut in two and
hollowed out, much like dugout canoe. The sender placed a bottle of whiskey
into the hollowed out-bread, but when his package arrived, the bottle was
gone. All the GI got was a stale loaf of bread with the inside portion missing.
There were many methods for getting things past the New York inspectors, and
a few succeeded. I did not have any trouble, but then I never tried to have
anyone send me goods of a questionable nature.

By the end of summer, our relations with the German people had become more
open, and we no longer had to view each other with suspicion. There had been
a lot of looting -- outright stealing, in fact -- after the War ended. To the
victor belong the spoils was the motto of many Gls. I had no feelings of guilt
when taking a pistol or even something personal like a camera or a watch from
a German whom I had captured during the fighting, but I could not just take
things from civilians. Sometime during the hostilities I picked up a German
camera. I was unaware of its value until a camera buff told me that it was
among the first single-lens reflex cameras in the world. Fool that I was, I sold
it to a camera store manager in downtown Bad Reichenhall to raise money for
a trip to Paris and London.

Lifting the fraternization ban prompted another phenomenon common to
armies of occupation, viz. soldiers' socializing with the local girls. Many
barracks beds were empty every night. The girls were rewarded for their
tawdry accommodation with things difficult to get in a defeated country -- silk
stockings, cigarettes, coffee, and sugar among them. Mostly I witnessed what
went on around me with detachment, but one case struck me as particularly
coarse and insensitive. One of the Gls took up semi-permanent residence with
a girl -- in her parents' house. I found that hard to fathom. I wondered to
myself, "Was the family so desperate as to sell a daughter? What kind of
parents would do that?!"

Passes were issued on a rotation system. One's position on the pass list may
have been determined by length of service, time since the last pass, or .,_
alphabetically -- who knows? Whatever the system, my name was someplace
in the middle of the first list. It rose to the top much sooner than I expected
because many Gls preferred staying with their Frauleins to accepting a pass.
Whenever a GI turned down a pass, his name was dropped to the bottom of the
list and everyone else's name was moved up. My name appeared at the top
quickly, and I was even given a longer pass than I expected. I chose to go to
Paris and London.

When I returned, I was no longer assigned to the 191st Tank Battalion and my
stay in Bad Reichenhall was over. The several months there had been very
interesting.

Chapter XV: A Tale of Two Cities (and a Few More)

The Mountains shall bring peace to the people (Psalm 71:3, KJV)

Sometime in mid-October, I was issued a pass to go to Paris and London. I went
with Dan Delacourt, whom I did not know very well. We were in the same
unit because of the points system. Dan turned out to be a nice guy and a good
traveling companion.

Dan and I arrived in Munich towards evening and stayed overnight in sleeping
quarters in the railroad station maintained by the Army for soldiers passing
through. The train we took the next morning was slow, and our coach was old
and poorly heated. We carried sleeping bags, which we used to keep warm
even in the daytime. The train stopped in Augsburg for about an hour.
I got off and walked around the area near the station; there the ever-present
Red Cross girls were dispensing doughnuts and coffee.

A scene on the loading platform caught my attention. There were several
young German men in Army uniform. They were all incapacitated in some
way. One of them had only one leg and was quite awkward on his crutches.
Another had a dangling empty sleeve. Very likely they had just been released
from some hospital or rehabilitation center and had not yet been home -- or
they would not have been in uniform. The German people ignored them
or ridiculed them to the point of being cruel. I cannot imagine what their
motives could have been. Perhaps the civilians were angry at the soldiers for
having lost the War. Finally another American and I helped the fellow on
crutches get onto his train. The people on the platform turned their backs and
disappeared.

At some stop in France, I sold a carton of Raleigh cigarettes to a man at the
station. I wanted some more French money for our stay in Paris. Raleighs were
the least popular cigarettes among American soldiers. The Frenchman either
did not know or did not care. He may have sold them for quite a bit more than
he paid me. There was always a thriving black market in sugar, coffee, and
American cigarettes.

We arrived in Paris at Gare du Nord [North Railroad Station] the next day. We
inquired about housing at an American Red Cross desk in the station. The lady
at the desk directed us to the Red Cross club in the city. The club was in a large
building complex used to house soldiers on furlough. We took the Metro
[subway] without any difficulty. Americans in uniform rode the Metro free of
charge. The main Red Cross building was full, so we stayed in a little "pension" across the street.
A pension is a small hotel, usually without a lobby and sometimes without an
elevator.
We were lucky because the accommodations in the main
building were like a 'Y.' Our room was elegant by comparison, and it offered
much more privacy. It had its own bath including a bidet, something new to
both Dan and me. We ate most of our meals in the main building. Whenever
we were away from our quarters at meal time, we ate off the street. We tried
not to eat street fare because the French had little food to spare. The
restaurants offered only a meager menu.

We hit many of the popular tourist sights of Paris. High points of our visit
included the Eiffel Tower (a high point!), the Madeleine (a church that looks like a Greek
temple), the Pantheon, the Arch of Triumph and Champs-Elysees, the Paris
Opera, the Louvre, the Sacre-Coeur Basilica, the Notre Dame Cathedral, and the
Montmartre section of the city. The places that impressed me the most were
the Louvre and Notre Dame Cathedral.

The Louvre was awesome. I had never visited a world-famous museum before.
Many of the art works were hidden during the War and were still in storage,
but the 'biggies' were on display -- Mona. Lisa.7 Winged Victory of Sa.mothra.ce7
and Venus de Milo among them. 3 Winged Victory, also known as Nike7 stands
in a spectacular setting on a stair landing near one of the Louvre entrances. 4 It
is a huge piece of statuary not easily moved, so it probably was not put away
during the War.
Notre Dame de Paris Cathedral is famous for many reasons. It is not the oldest
of the French Gothic cathedrals, nor does it have the greatest art glass. Neither
is it the largest. Those distinctions belong to other famous French churches,
e.g. Chartres, Rheims, Rouen, Amiens, etc. But Notre Dame is Notre Dame,
and it is and always will be regarded as the epitome of French Gothic
architecture.

At the time I thought of Notre Dame as a Catholic university in South Bend,
Indiana, or the setting for The Hunchback of Notre Dame. Victor Hugo's
wonderful tale of Quasimodo, the deformed dwarf who lived in one of the
cathedral's towers. During my high school and college days, Notre Dame was
a football team Protestants loved to hate.

Our guide at the cathedral spoke English. I suppose English-speaking persons
were chosen to take people through because most of the tourists were American
soldiers. I had been in many old churches during the War. Every village had
two, one Catholic and the other Lutheran. Even the grandest of them did not
prepare me for Notre Dame. It was unlike anything that I had ever seen. The
guide did a good job of showing us around. To me the huge rose window was
the cathedral's most impressive feature. It was removed and hidden during the
War, but, fortunately for us, it had been reinstalled by the time we visited Paris.
We were disappointed that we could not go up into either of the towers.

The Notre Dame guide told an interesting story -- perhaps apocryphal, perhaps
true. He said that the church had an interesting custom. When a cardinal
died, his red hat was suspended from the cathedral ceiling by a string. When
the string decayed or broke and the hat fell, the soul of the deceased cardinal
left purgatory. When Cardinal Richelieu, an unpopular French cardinal during
the reign of Louis XIII, died, his hat was suspended by a wire.

We wanted to go to the top of the Eiffel Tower. The tower had been closed
during the War and was just being reopened. The elevator had not yet been
put back into service, but we were allowed to climb the steps to the first level.
We ate at the restaurant there. The food wasn't great, but the view was
spectacular.

It was expected of every visiting GI that he see one of the two famous Parisian
shows, the Folies Bergere or the Casino de Paris. We did not get to either one.
Many of the Gls staying at. the Red Cross club spoke of their visits to these
burlesque shows and said they were very good.

After about a week in Paris, we caught a train for the coast. The English
Channel can be very stormy during the autumn and winter months. It was
now early November, and the weather was terrible. Because of the foul
weather we had to wait several days before boarding a ferry. The Red Cross
and the American Army Special Services maintained a hotel for detained
travelers in the small town of Etretat. With the crashing of the surf, we could
hear the detonation of mines being washed ashore. The explosions were
especially disturbing to those of us who had been in combat. Many of the
soldiers reacted by bounding out of bed and throwing themselves flat on
the floor.

After a few days, we caught a railroad ferry bound for Portsmouth. The
weather was still bad when we left, and the trip was rough. The ferry was
much like our Puget Sound ferries except that instead of transporting cars, the
ferry carried trains. The ends were closed while at sea. I always believed that
an ocean-going vessel was safe because of its several compartments: if one
compartment took on water, the other compartments would keep it afloat.
When I saw that our rail ferry had only one big open compartment, my faith
was a little shaken. But our ferry made it to the English Coast without incident.

Upon landing, we took a train to London, where we stayed at the Red Cross
club in Grosvenor Square, right across the street from the United States
embassy. Gen. Eisenhower's headquarters were in Grosvenor Square before the
invasion, and many members of his staff lived in the same building that now
housed the Red Cross club. The desk clerk was a beautiful English-speaking
girl. I wanted to ask her for a date immediately, just like every other GI who
registered at that desk, but a big sign on the wall behind the check-in counter
strongly advising against asking Red Cross girls to go out dissuaded me. I know
for a fact that there were violations of the rule, but I went along with it.

By the time we were assigned our quarters, it was early evening and already too
late to go anywhere. So I went down to the public rooms, where an extremely
interesting ping pong match was in progress. A Red Cross lady was playing
a soldier. She was ambidextrous, so she could toss her paddle from one hand to
the other and hit the ball equally well with either. She won.

I met a Scotsman in the lobby and tried to engage him in conversation. He was
willing to talk, but his Scottish burr was so thick I could hardly understand
him. He was from some important regiment, and his uniform was very
colorful. I also met a staff sergeant in a line company of the American 1st
Infantry Division, the 'Big Red One,' so-called because the division's patch
had a big red "1" on it. The unusual thing about him was that
he landed in North Africa in 1942 and was in every battle that his division
fought -- and he never suffered so much as an abrasion!

After breakfast at the Red Cross club, we set out to see London. We could ride
the underground, called the 'tube,' and surface buses for a very little fare. On
the first day we visited Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament, which
we found impressive. I was not quite so awed by the brighter, more inviting
Westminster Abbey as I was by Notre Dame. English Gothic and French Gothic
are different architectural styles, but I really did not have a preference. I saw
little bomb damage in public buildings, and Big Ben was working just fine.

That night we went to a dance for servicemen. I learned the hokey pokey, to
and the English girls wanted to do that dance all night.
(Footnote 10: June Johnson, our friend from England, remembers the hokey pokey.

Early during our stay in London we ate wherever we slept. Then one day an
Englishman told us of a small restaurant that served steaks and fresh
vegetables. We tried it, liked it, and went back several times. The steaks,
rumored to be horse meat, were a little tough, but we ate them anyway. The
fresh tomatoes could not be faked.

We did not see so many of the tourist attractions as we might have seen. Parts
of London were still nothing but rubble. Dan and I spent a lot of time loafing
and going to movies. Engli,sh theaters allowed smoking, so we always tried to
sit low to avoid the pall of smoke. The movie that I liked the most was One
Hundred Men and a Girl; it starred Deanna Durbin.

Dan and I wanted to go to Scotland. I had been told at my company
headquarters that travel arrangements for trips into Scotland or Ireland had to
be made in London. We were not successful in getting pass extensions to go
to Scotland. Perhaps there ·was a quota system that depended on how many
American soldiers the hostelries and eateries could accommodate. At any rate
we could not go.

As a second choice, we elected to go to Ireland. In order to get a pass extension
to travel to Ireland, the applicant had to convince the issuing officer that he
had a relative or friend that he wanted to visit. Dan's last name was Delacourt
and Delacourt sounded Irish enough for him to get the extension -- but
Kratzke?! I talked my way past the officer in charge of pass extensions and
traveled as Dan's companion. I didn't even try to pose as an Irishman!

We went by rail to Holyhead, Wales, and there caught a ferry for Dublin. I was
standing at a bar on the ferry when the ship lurched violently to one side and
then righted itself as fast as it had reeled over. The bar drinks slid down to the
end of the bar, and all of us standing there grabbed whatever came flying by.
Many of the passengers ran up to the deck to find out what was going on. The
captain was averting mines. One of the crewmen fired his rifle from the stern
and managed to detonate one of them. The ferry ride turned out to be more
exciting and dangerous than we had bargained for!

It was late at night when we finally docked in Dublin. We were directed to a
house not far from the center of town. Four of us shared a cab, and soon we
arrived at our lodging. It was what would now be called a bed and breakfast.
The house was very nice and must have been the home of a wealthy
professional person. Six of us shared a large upstairs bedroom. It might have
been a sitting room in another day, for it had a fireplace. Although it was near
midnight when we arrived, we were told that the cook would prepare a meal of
steak, eggs, potatoes, and fresh tomatoes if we wanted it. We opted for
a sandwich and went to bed. Our breakfast the next morning was the huge
meal that we had been offered the night before .

In a complete contrast to London, Dublin was untouched by the War and
bustled with activity. The restaurants had ample fresh meat and produce. We
stayed inside Dublin for our sightseeing because there seemed to be no
convenient way to visit the surrounding countryside. Two of the well-known
tourist attractions in Dublin are the Book of Kells at Trinity college and Dublin
Castle. We missed both of them, more out of ignorance than for lack of time or
inconvenience of location.

The people of Dublin were extremely friendly. A serviceman in an American
uniform was admitted to just about anything the city had to offer for very little
cost. By contrast, English servicemen dared not wear their uniforms at all
because the Irish considered the presence of one English soldier on Irish soil
tantamount to a British armed invasion -- and the soldier could be shot.
One rainy afternoon we went to see Marco Polo, a film starring Gary Cooper,
but the other days we spent walking about the city, taking in whatever sights
there might be. I was appalled by some of the street scenes. The Irish are very
emotional, so street demonstrations were common. Panhandlers were
everywhere. Seeing a mother nursing her infant and begging at the same time
came as a rude awakening for this sheltered Midwestern country boy.

In Ireland, custom officials searched travelers both entering and leaving the
country, so Dan and I had to pass through customs twice. The officials were
especially strict with people going out of Ireland. Every English person was
thoroughly searched. The wall behind the service counter had a shelf full of
whiskey and other spirits confiscated from English citizens. An American in
uniform was not even questioned: we could have taken anything we wanted out
of the country. An Englishman, perhaps a soldier in civilian clothes,
approached Dan and asked him to carry a bottle of Irish whiskey onto the ferry
and then return it when we were at sea. Dan declined.

Once back in London we went back to the Red Cross club and prepared to
return to France. Again we were delayed a few days by the bad weather in the
English Channel. We had no convenient way to notify our outfit of our
situation, so we just waited until the weather cleared and then boarded the
ferry. On one of the decks I saw an interesting poker game played by only two
players. They were playing five-card stud, which usually requires at least four
or five players to be a good game. The two soldiers were playing with nothing
but £ (one pound) notes. I I The game was very fast. When we reached the
harbor in France, they were about even.
(Footnote 11: A £ was worth about $4.00 in 1945, which is about $30.00 in 1997.

We had a few more days in Paris before we had to return to Germany. I had
been gone more than a month on a two-week pass.

Chapter XVI: Winter in the Bavarian Alps

At the end of my 'grand tour' of Paris, London, and Dublin, I had to come back
to reality. I had a wonderful trip! I returned in late November, but I cannot
recall where I spent Thanksgiving. (Foreign countries do not observe the
holiday.)

When we arrived in Munich, Dan and I had trouble finding our respective
units. In the month that we were gone, each of us had been transferred, not to
the same unit. Because of my discharge points, I was transferred to the 774th
Tank Battalion stationed in a small town south of Munich. I don't remember
where Dan went.

I knew only one person in my new unit, Ray 'Shorty' Fisher. He had been
a driver for one of the tanks in the Assault Gun Platoon.
Time passed slowly because everyone was awaiting discharge. We had no
specific duties, so we read a lot and played poker and blackjack. The weather
was cold and rainy, so we didn't do much sightseeing.

I had been in the 774th only a few weeks when I was transferred to the
XX Corps Artillery, which was stationed in Berchtesgaden. I had visited
Berchtesgaden during my Bad Reichenhall stay, so I was familiar with the
pretty town and its surroundings. I was pleased to be going there.

Because unit assignment was made according to number of points and not
according to Military Occupation Specialty number, the usual functions of
a unit were seldom carried out. There were very few artillerymen in the
XX Corps Artillery, and those few were there by accident, not by design. To
keep troop morale as high as possible and to preserve some semblance of order,
each unit had to find something for each person to do. At first I ran the Post
Exchange, a servicemen's store that sold cigarettes, candy, etc. The PX was
located in a small storefront across the street from one of the Catholic churches
in downtown Berchtesgaden. My duties were simple. The systems for keeping
books and inventory accounting had been set up by someone else, so I just had
to see that the store was run honestly. I was required to make a regular report
to the Special Services group that ran all the PXs in the area. Several girls from
the Women's Army Corps worked for me. They waited on customers, stocked
shelves, etc. They, too, were just biding time, awaiting shipment home.

The PX job didn't last long. The mail clerk was transferred, so I applied for and
was given his job. I had to :v.iake a daily trip to Salzburg with the outgoing mail
and pick up the incoming mail. Except when I had to drive in bad weather, my
job was very nice. I was not assigned any particular vehicle, so every day
I went to the motor pool and picked up whatever was available. More often
than not I got a Jeep, but occasionally I was given a command car, a somewhat
larger vehicle. Sometimes I carried passengers -- people who had made prior
arrangements to catch rides -- like organized hitchhiking.

One day I was to take a civilian couple from the Post Hotel in Berchtesgaden to
their hotel in Salzburg. They were a dual vaudeville team working the United
Service Organization circuit. They needed quite a bit of luggage for their props
and such. I happened to have an open command car that day, and the weather
was cold and clear. The couple did not mind at all: they were bundled up and
stayed warm.

There were two routes to Salzburg. One was faster but less interesting. It
involved going down a steep hill, which could be treacherous if there were ice
on the roads. The other was safer and more scenic but took longer. The day
I carried the show business passengers I gave them the scenic tour. They were
enthralled by the beauty of the countryside.

My daily trips to Salzburg were interesting and fun. I always dropped the
outgoing mail at the Army Post Office on the way into town. Then I would go
to the Red Cross canteen on the Mozartplatz, one of the main squares of the
city, for coffee and doughnuts. I learned much about the city by watching and
listening. Just being in Salzburg was a pleasure.

Some WACs stationed in Berchtesgaden started a little library on the second
floor of a downtown building. First they got permission to use the space; then
they scrounged around and found some semi-attractive furniture to make it
into a comfortable reading room. They added some English language books and
American periodicals for the servicemen. With a ping pong table in an
adjacent room, the library became an enlisted man's social club. I spent many
evenings there.

The music and drama scene in Salzburg provided another opportunity for
entertainment and socializing. I attended several concerts that winter. General
Mark Clark was at one of these. He had a box in the center of the balcony, and
the orchestra sounded the appropriate Ruffles and Flourishes to usher him to
his seat. The musicians were all Austrian or German, so very likely they did
not understand the significance of the piece they were playing.

Whenever I wanted transportation for myself, I tried to get a closed vehicle.
Jeeps were always open, but some of the command cars had canvas side
curtains to make them a little ·warmer. I had a Jeep the night I went to the
concert that Gen. Clark attended. It was a cold night, and I had a date. I told
the girl to dress warmly, but she did not understand just how cold an open Jeep
could be! Apparently I did not make much of an impression on her, for even
though the concert was good, she never went out with me again. She probably
found some GI with a closed car.

Some of the troops stationed in Berchtesgaden lived in the Berchtesgadner Hof,
a posh hotel taken over by the Army. The back of the hotel faced the Alps, so
the rooms on that side and the dining patio commanded a beautiful view of
Mount Watzmann, the highest mountain in that region of the Bavarian Alps.
I stayed at the Hof for only a short time because I was among those who had to
leave to make room for some visiting dignitaries from the Nurnberg War
Crimes Trials during their Christmas recess. Justice Robert Jackson, who
headed the tribunal that conducted the trials, was an American Supreme Court
judge, and when his entire contingent chose to spend the holidays in
Berchtesgaden, he used his clout to have them registered at the Berchesgadner
Hof, the best hotel in town.
(Footnote 1: The Berchtesgadener Hof is still a Rest and Recreation center for American troops stationed
in Germany.

My next room was in a dormitory made into a barrack. It was on the XX Corps
Artillery Headquarters grounds. The headquarters office, mail room, mess hall
and motor pool were all convenient. My roommate was Eugene O'Grady.
Gene had a Fraulein in town, so I had a private room most of the time. Gene
slept in our room, his official quarters, only when there was something
important like inspection the next morning.

One day I was approached by Horst and Wolfgang, boys about thirteen or
fourteen years old, who asked if their mother could wash my clothes. They also
offered to work for me for very little compensation. I accepted on both counts.
Their mother did my laundry very nicely, and the boys ran errands and
polished my boots. But I could never got them to arrange my things in the
manner specified by the United States Army. According to US regulations,
boots are lined up under one's bed with the toes out. In the German Army,
a soldier's boots are placed under his bed with the heels out -- and these boys
still followed the German dictate. I always managed to correct their mistakes
before inspection.

A lot of fellows had German girl friends, so Gene's sleeping in town was not
unusual. The Army should have done something to discourage the practice, but
who would blow the whistle when many officers were doing the same thing?
One day a full colonel ordered an enlisted man to deliver a load of firewood to
a certain civilian. The enlisted man was suspicious, so he checked out the
house. A pretty girl answered his knock, and he heard the colonel's voice
commg from another room. The enlisted man spoke loudly enough for the
colonel to recognize his voice. The enlisted man left, and the colonel never said
another word to him about the incident.

Once the motor pool people came to lunch in the mess hall and announced
excitedly that they had a big armor-plated Mercedes that once belonged to
Hermann Goering, head of the Luftwaffe, parked in the compound. Everyone gathered around the
car, and one of the motor pool sergeants offered to drive people around
the parking lot. I rode in the Mercedes a few minutes. I had seen pictures of
Hitler's automobile, and his and Goering's cars looked very much alike.
Another automobile that found its way into our motor pool was a German
Horch, later renamed the Audi. "Horch" comes from the German word "to hear" and
"Audi" comes from the Latin word "to hear."  The car was an oddity to us
Americans because it used charcoal for
fuel. A contraption that looked like a water heater was mounted vertically on
the left side of the rear bumper. German fuel went for airplanes, tanks, and
other front line vehicles, so some clever engineers improvised and built the
charcoal burner for use in civilian automobiles. The burner probably ruined
the engine.

A maker of custom skis had a shop in the center of town. I wanted to have
some skis made to order, but when I found that the job would take several
weeks and I wanted to ski as soon as possible, I had to find another way to get
equipment. I frequently went to the Schiffmeister, the hotel on the north shore
of the Konigssee where soldiers could stay free of charge. The rooms, furnished
in 'resort rustic' with a down comforter on every bed, were very nice, and
I always managed to get a room with a view of the lake. The hotel ran a ski
hut, where American soldiers paid no rent for use of skis, poles -- whatever.
Thus I spent a lot of time on the slopes with good -- though not my own -- skis.
The only lift was a rope tow, but we thought it was great. A major from the
German ski troops gave me some pointers, as did Horst and Wolfgang. Both
boys were good skiers; very likely they started skiing as soon as they could
walk. My ski experience at Konigssee got me started on Alpine skiing. I caught
the 'bug' and would ski for most of the rest of my life.

I became more homesick as Christmas approached. I had friends, of course, but
no one with whom I could share my beliefs and holiday traditions. I had been
going to the Evangelische Kirche [Lutheran church[ regularly, so, of course,
I went there on Christmas Eve. Much to my surprise, a WAC choir in the
balcony sang several times during the service. I did not know about the choir.
The women had not let the word out -- nor had they made any effort to recruit
men. The service was beautiful. It snowed that night, and Berchtesgaden was
at its prettiest. The town looked like a travel brochure picture of Christmas in
Tyrol.  NB: 4 Thirty five years later, I took Ruth to that church. I described many details of the building
to her, and when we went in, I was pleased to find that my memory was accurate. The two of
us attended a service in the church in 1989; it was still unchanged.

The girls that ran the Red Cross club put on a New Year's Eve party in a hall
near the Schiffmeister Hotel. Besides the dance floor there was a second room
for serving refreshments. The girls put up decorations and managed to find
party foods such as beer and soft drinks for the occasion. There was a nominal
admission to cover the girls' out-of-pocket expenses. Strictly speaking, liquor
was not allowed, but many service people came with a bottle of booze anyway.
The party was fun until a fight broke out. I saw the whole thing but stayed out
of the way. A Navy yeoman with the Justice Jackson War Crimes Tribunal from
Nurnberg with too many drinks under his belt became belligerent. (Germany
was Army country, so many soldiers viewed Navy personnel with a jaundiced
eye anyway.) The yeoman pushed his luck when he began to insult the Army.
A big burly first sergeant asked (told) him to 'knock it off.' The sailor started
swinging with a broken beer mug. The sergeant took the mug away from the
sailor and hit him with it. The sailor got a nasty cut on the head. Several of us
took him to the hotel, but he was hard to keep down. A medic finally gave him
a shot of something and carried him off to the dispensary in town, where he got
stitched up. He appeared at dinner in the Schiffmeister on New Year's Day
with a bandaged head. The first sergeant was in the dining room, and
I expected more fireworks. Instead the sailor approached the sergeant's
table -- all smiles -- and asked if he could join the sergeant's party for dinner.
They acted like old friends, and I doubt anything more ever came of the
incident.

During the same New Year's Day dinner, we were treated to an impromptu ice
skating show. The windows of the hotel dining room looked out on the shore of
Konigssee. The lake was frozen, and someone had groomed the ice in front
of the hotel so it could be used for serious figure skating. We considered the
young lady performing for us to be very good. Whether she was or not makes
no difference. All of the diners thought she was great.

I settled into a routine after the holidays. I went to Salzburg every day to pick
up and deliver mail for my unit. I attended concerts in Salzburg whenever
I could, and I went to Konigssee to ski as often as possible. I, like everyone else,
was biding my time and awaiting the announcement that soldiers in the point
spread including my number would be the next to go back to the States.
My day came in February. I liked Bavaria, but it couldn't compare with the
little prairie town in Minnesota that was my home.

Chapter XVII: Home

The first step in my journey home took me to the collection depot in Rosenheim,
a town between Salzburg and Munich. There each of us was assigned to
a camp on the French coast. The coastal camps were named for cigarettes
brands -- Lucky Strike, Chesterfield, etc. I was sent to Camp Phillip Morris
near LeHavre, a depot for soldiers being sent to New York. Veterans bound for
Boston or various southern ports in the United States were taken to other
camps. The troops exuded a cheerful air of expectancy, although a few Gls
were not happy to be going home. Some were leaving girl friends or wives
behind. (The wives would be sent to the United States at some later date.)
Others were leaving lucrative black market businesses. Camp Phillip Morris
was dreary and its grounds muddy, but no one seemed to notice. Wooden
sidewalks connected all the important buildings, so we didn't have to slosh
around in the muck. I was assigned to a tent with some very nice fellows. We
hoped to be shipped out together, but we weren't.

On a gloomy day in February, I left Camp Philip Morris and went to LeHavre,
where, after the usual Army delay, I boarded the USS George Washington,
a converted luxury liner much like the Santa Rosa that took me overseas in the
first place. Prior to boarding ship, we had to exchange all of our foreign
currency for American money. We could convert funds only in an amount
equal to the sum of all our pay while in Europe plus ten percent. Some fellows
had much too much money from their black market dealings or large gambling
winnings. Several Gls approached me and asked if I would exchange some of
their money for them. I had enough of my own to use up all of my allowance,
but even if I had not, I would not have done as they asked. Not only was such
an exchange illegal: it was also asking for trouble with the military authorities.
I thought it strange that we were limited on money exchange but could take
home all the merchandise and souvenirs we wanted. I had a German pistol,
a camera, a Swiss watch, and a leather telephone case.
I acquired the German pistol in a trade, the camera from the camera shop in Bad
Reichenhall, the Swiss watch also in a trade, and the leather case from a
German Signal Corps Officer.  Had those items been
given their proper value and added to my exchange allowance, I would have
been way over my limit.  I gave the watch to my father and the pistol to my son Peter. I kept the camera for
myself, and my children used the leather case to contain a puzzle of the United States.

It takes a long time to load a troopship, so we could not leave immediately. My
quarters were crowded and modest, but I was so happy to be going home that
I did not mind at all. The GW was a bigger and nicer ship than the Santa Rosa,
and the food tasted good. Perhaps everything seemed better because I was
going west instead of east.

On the first day out of LeHavre our ship stopped unexpectedly. We were in the
middle of the English Channel in calm seas, so there seemed to be no reason to
delay our getting under way. After what seemed a long time just sitting
motionless, a harbor tender pulled alongside, and some very official-looking
Frenchmen came aboard. We had a stowaway on our ship. He was found and
taken aboard the tender, which headed back to shore. We passengers never
learned who the stowaway was. Was he a smuggler, a European trying to reach
America, an American without a passport? The possibilities were endless!

Shipboard activities became routine and boring. We were fed three meals
a day, each served in several shifts. Movies were shown in some of the larger
rooms, and there was a lot of reading and gambling. We had one lifeboat drill.
I witnessed one exciting incident. A crap game was being played on a blanket
in a secluded passageway. Some GI had organized the game, and because he
owned the blanket and the dice, he made the rules and ran the game. He called
himself the 'house.' The rules were the usual for craps -- with one exception.
Anytime craps ( 1, 2, or 12) was rolled, the house picked up the shooter's bet.
Those who had 'faded' the shooter would ordinarily have won that money, but
instead they got to take back only what they had bet -- the loser's money going
to the 'house.' Some gambler entered the game without knowing the rules. He
'faded' the shooter for some part of the shooter's bet, and when the shooter
rolled craps, he thought that he had won. The 'house' picked up the money the
newcomer thought was his. He was furious and had to be restrained. Even
after the rules were explained he continued to berate the 'house' and all of the
other players. He got his money back in a dark passageway that night.
The 'house' got roughed up a bit but chose not to resist. He learned never
again to run a game without everyone's knowing the house rules.

The voyage from New York to Marseilles took two weeks, but the return trip
required only one. The USS George Washington was considered a fast liner.
Viewing the Statue of Liberty was quite a thrill. It seemed like a long time since
I had seen her on the way out of New York Harbor. Upon landing we were
taken immediately to Camp Kilmer, New Jersey, where I boarded a troop train
going to Camp McCoy, near Sparta, Wisconsin.

The train arrived about 2:00 A.M. Incoming troops were delivered to barracks
and told to meet in the mess hall. There each of us was informed he could have
any meal he wanted -- or he could have something light and collect a special
meal the next day. The cooks had been instructed to prepare food for arriving
troops at any time of the day or night. Everyone elected to have something like
a coffee and doughnuts and go to bed. The next day at noon I had a steak
dinner with apple pie and ice cream for dessert.

The Army discharge procedure did not take very long. Most of the paperwork
had been done in advance. If a soldier wanted medical or dental care, he was
allowed to choose between getting it immediately at Camp McCoy or waiting
and having it done as a civilian. No one in my group stayed for any medical or
dental work. I needed some tooth repair but chose to have it done later.
I wanted to get home too much to wait around.

I called home as soon as I found a phone. I thought that my call would be a big
surprise to my parents, but they had known that I was in the United States from
the moment I landed. The Army sent a telegram to the next of kin of every
returning veteran. Mother and Dad even knew when to expect me to arrive in
Villard.

On the day that I was scheduled to leave, a major came into my barracks and
asked for me. I could not imagine what the trouble might be. I was anxious to
get going and worried that I might be detained. The major was pleasant and
invited me to go with him. We got into his staff car and were taken across the
post. There we went into a building where a captain was waiting for us.
The captain told me that I had not received my Purple Heart and Bronze Star
medals. The action at Gertwiller did not go unnoticed after am The
presentation was brief but impressive. The major then had his driver take us
back to my barracks, where I stuffed the medals into my duffel bag and hurried
back to the major's car. The major took me to the train just in time for
departure: I was headed for St. Paul only minutes after I arrived at the station!

There was a festive air aboard that train. About half of the passengers were
discharged servicemen. They were boisterous in celebrating their new civilian
status. A major addressed a GI as Sergeant and was quickly told that Mister was
the correct title. They put their arms around each other and shouted their
delight. Liquor was not in evidence, so the party remained only noisy, never
out-of-hand. Some of the veterans got off along the way, so the car grew
quieter as we approached St. Paul.

In St. Paul I had to wait until late afternoon for the 'Soo' line local to take
me to
Glenwood. I ate in the St. Paul depot, boarded my train, and settled back for
the three-hour trip. I leaned out the half-open door between cars as we
approached the station in Glenwood, and I remember catching my first glimpse
of my parents and my brother Paul. (Bob, my other brother, was in the Army,
stationed at Fort Belvoir, Virginia.) It was cold on the station platform, but the
four of us stood and talked anyway, our reunion happy and tearful at the same
time. The ten-mile ride to Villard was pleasant. When we got home my
mother set out all sorts of food. I really was not hungry, but I ate anyway.
Mother and Paul went to bed late that night, and my father and I stayed up to
talk of many things until early the next morning.

My return caused little excitement in Villard. Many veterans had already come
home, so one more vet was hardly newsworthy. The local weekly newspaper
carried a small notice but nothing more. I hardly expected a parade down
Main Street!

Many consumer goods were still hard to come by in early 1945. I could wear
some of my pre-War civilian clothes, but most of those things did not fit very
well. (I had lost nearly forty pounds!) I needed (or wanted) some new white
shirts, but I could not find any in Villard. I managed to replenish some items in
my wardrobe in nearby Alexandria and Glenwood. I bought my first post-War
suit, a brown pin-stripe model, in Minneapolis. One might think that after all
those years wearing khaki, I would hardly pick a brown suit. Indeed it was my
last choice, but it was the only one I could find. Months later I purchased
a second suit, a blue one.

The return to civilian life affected every veteran differently. Some ex-Gis had
a difficult time adjusting. Many were so nervous that any loud noise spooked
them: they would fall to the ground at the noise of an automobile's backfiring,
a sound not at all like the shot of a rifle or explosion of an artillery shell. Some
ex-servicemen wore clothes as far removed in color and style from service
uniforms as they could find. One fellow I knew bought several of the most
gaudy, hand-painted silk neckties one could imaginer I was less flamboyant,
and my adjustment was really very easy.

I wanted to go back to school as soon as possible. I went to Minneapolis to
check out the University of Minnesota class schedule for spring quarter. My GI
Bill of Rights entitlement took away much of the economic burden of my
returning to the classroom. It authorized me to attend the school of my choice
for as long as I was in service plus one year -- up to a maximum of four years.
I resolved to use as much of my educational privilege as possible.
(Footnote 2: The GI Bill of Rights is the popular name for the 1944 Servicemen's Readjustment Act, which
provided United States veterans of World War II with special assistance. The act supported
the economy against a postwar slump, raised the national educational level, and made
housing available. Sponsored by President Roosevelt and supported by veterans' groups, the
act had several major provisions:

(Continue Footnote: 1. A veteran was entitled to as much as four years of education and/or vocational training
with tuition up to $500.00 per year, charges for books and fees, and living allowances of
$50.00 per month for a single veteran and $75.00 for a man with dependents, all at
government expense.
(Continue Footnote: 2. A veteran was entitled to as many as fifty-two weeks of unemployment insurance at
$20.00 per week. Taking advantage of this stipulation was called Membership in the 52-20
Club.
(Continue Footnote: 3. A veteran was entitled to buy a home, farm, or business with a loan guaranteed by the
Veterans' Administration.
Amendments in 1945 raised tuition payments above $500.00, living allowances to $65.00 and
$90.00 for single and married men respectively, and home-loan guarantees from $2,000.00 to
$4,000.00.
(Continue Footnote: Though the GI Bill contributed to the building boom in the suburbs after World War II, its
major impact was on education. Educators were unprepared for the flood tide of more than
2.5 million veterans who became students in 1946 and 194 7. Villages of prefabricated houses
and trailers became as common as dormitories on college campuses everywhere.

I stayed with my Aunt Emma and Uncle Gust, my Minneapolis relatives, for
a few days while checking things out at the U of M. I found that the third
quarter was not a good time to get back into the academic scene because too
many courses were taught in sequence beginning with fall quarter. I chose to
start classes during the summer, at which time I would go through the red tape
necessary to get back into school and to begin receiving my veteran's benefits.
I also arranged for room and board in a fraternity house. After taking care of
those details, I went to St. Louis to visit relatives and friends.

Back in Villard, I found time heavy on my hands. I needed little time to
'unwind.' I wanted to get moving again. There were few jobs awaiting
returning veterans in a sm~ll town. Even if I could have found employment
nearby, I had no car for the commute.

My father let me use the family automobile for several all-day excursions. The
springtime weather was nice and the outings pleasant, but they did not use up
much time.

I occupied myself for awhile by doing some work on the church and the
parsonage. The parsonage was in need of paint, so I painted it. I also helped
the trustees with routine maintenance of the church. I worked for Art Fischer
occasionally on a day-to-day basis. I had worked for him before the War, so
I knew what he wanted. Art was in heavy construction and moving: he moved
such things as buildings, huge boilers, etc. I sometimes worked a shift at the
switchboard in the telephone office. The telephone company in Villard was
owned and operated by a man and his son and daughter-in-law. The
switchboard had to be tended twenty-four hours a day, so they appreciated
having someone who could take over occasionally. I learned a lot doing odd
jobs while waiting to go back to school.

In June it was time for me to go to Minneapolis for the University of Minnesota
summer session. Mother and Dad took me down to the city. I think they used
my move as an excuse to take a short trip. Travel during the War had been
restricted by gas rationing, so an outing was a special treat.
Now I was back in school. I went home on weekends, and I joined Villard's
baseball team. Rural leagues played their games on Sunday afternoons. I didn't
always have a way of getting back to Minneapolis after the games, so Dad
frequently took me to Sauk Center, where I caught a Greyhound bus.

One weekend my parents picked me up in Minneapolis so that I could go to
Judy Heyne's wedding with them. The Heynes lived in neighboring Detroit
Lakes when I was a kid, buf Pastor Heyne had since taken a call to Waconia.
The wedding was to be there. I recall that I found it strange that 'little' Judy
Heyne was getting married. Her older brother Bob, who was my age, and I had
been good friends all through grade school. I came to realize suddenly that life
went on while I was away and that the Judy Heynes of the world grew up
during that time and were now getting married.

Tom Olson was the only one of my old friends who returned to Minneapolis.
Tom's roommate, Merle Gorder, was a Navy fighter pilot with weekend reserve
duty. Battle Lake, his home town, was in central Minnesota, and he would
frequently fly over his parents' home while on 'weekend warrior' duty. I doubt
the Navy would have approved his flying upstate to 'buzz' his family and
friends!

That summer the congregation in Villard arranged a celebration honoring
Dad's twenty-fifth anniversary of ordination into the ministry. There was an
afternoon service in the church and afterwards other activities in the town hall.
Some of the Waconia and Minneapolis relatives came. The congregation's gift
to my father was a sum of money to be put towards a new car. The family
automobile made it through the War. It had to: no new cars were built during
those years. Dad ordered a new DeSoto, which was at that time, a Chrysler product.
The dealer placed the order and told
Dad the car might not be delivered fully equipped.  For example, some cars were delivered with wooden bumpers -- with a promise that the
regular metal bumpers would be installed by the dealer as soon as they were available.

When his first post-War DeSotos were delivered, the local dealer sold all of them
to customers willing to pay extra 'under the table' money. There was nothing that
Dad could do but take back his down payment and go to another dealer. He then
purchased
a nice new Chevrolet.

Several incidents during my adjustment to civilian life reminded me that there
had been a war. The civilian population on the home front was used to
restrictions -- and also certain abuses. There were many who cheated on the
system, and there had been a thriving black market in scarce commodities. As
a veteran, I was a 'babe in the woods' and did not always understand what was
going on. I should have known, I suppose, because I had seen it all in post-War
Europe. I just thought that sort of thing would not happen in the United States.
How naive!

While at the University of Minnesota I often hitchhiked to my destination. On
one occasion in the summer of 1946, I was picked up by a fellow who was very
talkative. He said that he got along just fine during the War. He had no
trouble getting tires and gasoline on the black market. He boasted of his ability
to get by when everyone el~e was having difficulty. Near the end of my ride
I casually remarked that I had served in the Armored Forces and on several
occasions we could have used some of his gasoline. He was very quiet after
that.

In September I moved out of the fraternity house into a rooming house near
campus. Phil Johnson, a good friend and high school classmate of my brother
Bob, was my roommate. Our room was typical of accommodations around any
urban campus, but its rent seemed high. During the War, the government had
imposed controls on rents in an effort to hold down inflation. The control was
still in effect in 1946, so it was easy for us to determine what our rent should
have been. Phil and I checked with the Office of Price Administration and
found that our landlord was, indeed, charging more than the ceiling. We
informed him, and he professed ignorance of the law. He said that he had just
purchased the house and that the previous owner had not informed him of the
rules. Legally we could have claimed treble damages, i.e. we could have asked
for three times the amount he overcharged. Instead we just asked that he
adjust our rent and apply the overpaid amounts to our next month's rent. He
agreed, of course, and we enjoyed the rest of our stay in his house.

Almost all of the people with whom I had contact during my first regular
quarter back on campus were very nice. Sometimes I wore a veteran's pin,
affectionately dubbed a Ruptured Duck, in my coat lapel, but I really didn't
need it. Somehow people could always spot a veteran, even without a label!

Baseball had always been my favorite sport. The I 946 World Series pitted the
Boston Red Sox against the St. Louis Cardinals. I was a Cards fan, and I listened
to as much of the Series as I could. I may even have cut a class or two to hear
the games. The Cards won the series with a dramatic and famous play. Enos
'Country' Slaughter scored from first on a long single. Johnny Pesky, the Sox
shortstop, was the relay man on the throw in from the outfield, and he paused
just long enough for Slaughter to score. I remember the drama Phil and
I sensed as we sat with our ears glued to my little radio.

Not all faculty members were prepared to teach the veteran student. My
German instructor was really a high school teacher who was hired by the
University during the faculty shortage, and she treated us as if we were high
school kids. Some of the veterans objected strenuously, and she soon changed
her methods.

I still did not know what field I wanted to enter. I considered architecture
because it combined the artistic with the mathematical. I felt one's major
should be job-oriented rather than purely academic, that medicine and
engineering were preferable to history, English, physics, or chemistry. I had to
learn that a student could major in any one of these subjects and still find
employment, that he did not have to be a minister, a lawyer, a dentist, or
a businessman to support himself. I stumbled around trying to find my calling
until a few years later, when at Oregon State, Professor James Brady and
Professor Richard Dempster inspired me to study physics and mathematics.

Late in my first quarter back on campus I met Ruth Pauline Volkert at a Gamma
Delta function; Gamma Delta was an organization for Lutheran students on campus. It was sponsored by
the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod.
There was little chemical reaction between us in our first
encounter, but during winter quarter I took her out for the first time -- and not
long after that we became engaged.
We were married on April 4, I 948.

Chapter XVIII: A Soldier's Return

Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God. (Psalm 147:7 KJV)

For many years I gave little thought to my Army career. Few people asked
about it, and I never spoke of it voluntarily. I directed my attention toward my_
family, my church, and my profession. In the back of my mind, however,
I nurtured the idea that one day I would return to Europe and visit some of the
places that were important in my service experience. Eventually, that dream
became a reality several times over.

I first returned to Europe at Christmastime, 1978, when Ruth and I went on
a Reformation tour. Many of the sites relating to Martin Luther are in East
Germany, which was Communist in 1978. We spent a day in Paris before
flying to West Berlin. The Paris that I remembered as a soldier in 1945 had
changed, but the familiar landmarks were the same. My earlier experience
must have made a great impression on me because so much of what I had seen
came back to me.

Nothing on the German part of the tour seemed familiar. I had never been in
any of the places we visited. Only the evidence of destruction and rebuilding
in West Berlin gave me a vague sense of having been there before. Communist
East Germany was not nearly so well restored, and much of the remaining
rubble was a grim reminder of my earlier trip to the continent.

I sensed the War again at the concentration camp at Buchenwald. I had not
actually been there, but I had taken my tank into several other prison camps.
The sign Arbeit macht frei [Work makes one free.] over the gate struck
a familiar chord, for that sign is over the gate of every German prison camp.
I remembered it well from Dachau. The thought did not make much sense to
me at the time -- nor did it seem any more reasonable to me in 1978.

Work
makes one free in a prison camp involves a contradiction of terms. Only after
reading more about the Holocaust did I come to understand the terrible irony of
the expression.

In 1980, Ruth and I went on a tour that included the Oberammergau Passion
Play. Other stops along the way included Traunstein, Berchtesgaden, Salzburg,
and Worms -- all places where I had fought as a soldier or had visited as part
of the Occupation Army. Berchtesgaden interested me the most because I lived
there for several months. While there Ruth and I left the organized tour for
a few hours and took off on our own. The first familiar place we came upon
was the Berchtesgadner Hof, the best hotel in town. We walked around in the
public rooms and the patio in the back of the hotel. Nothing had changed, and
the magnificent view of Mount Watzman remained as lovely as I remembered.
Because of our limited time, we had to hurry along: I wanted to visit the church
I used to attend. Before we went in I described the interior to Ruth. I even
remembered how the chancel had been decorated for the 1945 Christmas Eve
service.

We stayed overnight in Traunstein, where I once attended a United Service
Organization show in 1945. Nothing about the town was familiar to me on my
second visit. Ruth had had a shoulder operation before we left Seattle, and
because she had to do daily physical therapy, we were always up before the rest
of our fellow travelers. While she was doing her exercises, I took a walk in
a city park near our hotel. At that quiet early hour I was quite alone when
I came to the memorial to the townspeople who fought and died in two world
wars. I reflected on many things in the serene beauty of the park. The people
there grieved for their lost loved ones just as much as their counterparts in
America. I felt a flood of emotion as I left for breakfast, where inevitably we'd
hear the schedule of the day's activities.

In the cathedral in Salzburg we heard the beautiful strains of a Schubert mass
being performed for the Feast of Assumption. Most of the other places in
Salzburg the tour group visited seemed familiar, and I enjoyed seeing them
again. One spot I did not remember was the gazebo in which Lisle and Rolf
danced in The Sound of Music. It is not located by the main house -- as one
might expect -- but across the lake from it. From Salzburg we went to
Innsbruck, the landmarks of which I remembered well.

The Passion Play at Oberammergau, the purpose of the tour, overshadowed my
memories of War. It was a truly wonderful happening, both as a dramatic
presentation and as a religious experience.
We toured more of Bavaria after the play. We watched the Glockenspiel in the
Rathaus [city hall] tower in Munich. At eleven o'clock every morning, figures
in the chiming clock come to life as two tiers of dancing and jousting
mechanical figures perform their hourly match. I recognized the square that
I had ridden through in a tank, but the Glockenspiel was not in operation
then.
(Footnote 1: In 1945, a GI donated paint to have the figures refurbished. In return for his favor, he got
to ride one of the life-size wooden horses in the jousting tournament. Thus the GI became a
knight(!) for a day.

Just a few kilometers northwest of Munich is Dachau, part our tour's itinerary.
I wondered how I would feel if I went there again, but I was determined not to
avoid the encounter and stayed with the group. Most of the camp had been
dismantled, so all that was seen on the near-empty grounds was a visitor center
with exhibits, and some interesting outdoor sculpture. The memorial is
a beautifully-executed work. It does not minimize the horror of the camp;
rather it presents the story in a tasteful and informative way.

In an effort to recall my exact feelings on that April day in 1945, I left Ruth to
be by myself for a time. My mind conjured up a jumble of images, none of
which was very coherent. I remembered a lot of shouting and crying and
screaming. There were gunshots as prisoners tried to kill their guards, and
Americans from the 45th Infantry Division had to maintain order under
extremely difficult conditions. One's first impulse under such horrible
circumstances is to help the victims, but there were too many of them to
administer aid one-on-one. The Medical Corps and the Military Police had
to be called upon to help. As soon as it was apparent that tank firepower
would not be needed, our unit was sent back to our battalion. There I learned
that some members of the battalion had been involved in the actual liberating
of the prisoners.

After a little time by myself, I rejoined Ruth in the main museum, where
enlarged photographs proved more electrifying than any mental images I may
have experienced while walking alone around the camp. (When Ruth and
I were in Israel with a group of students from the Lutheran Bible Institute of
Seattle in 1987, I was asked to speak a few words at one of the Holocaust
memorial sites. In my talk I said that we have been endowed with the great gift
of selective memory and that life would be intolerable were we unable to
forgive and put some things far back into the recesses of our memory banks.)

Worms, the next city on our itinerary, had special meaning for me, for I crossed
the Rhine in a tank there on Easter Sunday, April 1, 1945. After the War, the
town was completely restored, so in 1980, I got to see the Reformation sites that
I missed in 1945.

Many observations marked the anniversaries of the most important events of
World War II -- the bombing of Pearl Harbor, D-Day, VE-Day, and VJ-Day
among them. Two such commemorations that concerned me were the fortieth
and fiftieth anniversary observances of the Battle of Hatten-Rittershoffen. Ruth
and I attended both.

The Liberator, the 14th Armored Division Association's periodical, ran
announcements of many such occasions months in advance, and a division
veteran, who owned a travel agency, arranged special tours. Ruth and
I decided to go to the fortieth anniversary in 1985, but we wanted to travel
independently in order to see more of Europe than just a little corner of Alsace.

We flew from Seattle to Copenhagen and then on to Dusseldorf, Germany,
where we rented an Opel. We drove first to Cologne to visit its famous
cathedral and then went on to Bonn, the capitol of the West German Republic
at the time. Ruth recognized the city as the place of Beethoven's birth, and
I indulged her with a visit to that landmark of culture. From Bonn to Stolberg,
where we stayed at the charming and comfortable Altes Brauhaus Burgkeller,
a sixteenth century brewery converted into an inn. The meals there were
excellent. Ruth ordered steak tartar, raw ground beef with raw egg and capers.
I had something less exotic.

The next day we toured Aachen, ancient seat of the Holy Roman Empire. We
went to mass in Charlemagne's chapel, around which the Aachen cathedral was
built. Charlemagne was crowned the first Holy Roman emperor on Christmas
Day in 800, so the chapel may be the oldest building in which we have ever set
foot. The Allies captured Aachen, the first German city to be taken, in October,
1944.

Because 1985 marked the (ortieth anniversary of several important battles, we
met many other American veterans and their parties, especially near the
German-Belgian border. The Battle of the Bulge ended in late 1944, but its
fortieth anniversary observations were delayed until spring of 1985 to avoid
the bad weather of winter.2 The battle at Hatten-Rittershoffen, part of the
succeeding Operation Nordwind:4 was fought in January, 1945. Its fortieth
anniversary observation was deferred until May of 1985.
(Footnote 2: Winter in the Ardennes was terrible in 1944 and no better in 1984.

Ruth and I both read A Time for Trumpets, a book about the Battle of the Bulge
by Charles MacDonald. MacDonald was not only a good historian: he had
actually taken part in the battle. Places we visited mentioned in his book
include Bastogne, Malmedy, Wiltz, Clervaux, and Ettlebruck. Our innkeeper in
Wiltz was a World War II history buff. He was a just a boy in 1944, but he
recalled a meeting of Generals Eisenhower, Bradley, and Patton in the building
next to the inn. He lent us a German 'coffee-table' book about the Ardennes
Offensive (the German name for the Battle of the Bulge)
written from the German point of view.

In Clervaux we met a veterans' tour led by MacDonald himself. We spoke to
him and later joined his group for lunch. Ruth flattered MacDonald by telling
him that Fred Friedel, her military history teacher at Bellevue Community
College, admired his work and that his book Company Commander had been
required reading for the course. MacDonald acknowledged that Ruth had
a good teacher who knew whereof he spoke. He then wrote a short note to
Friedel, which Ruth hand delivered. Later in that eventful day Ruth rode down
the hill between the War museum and the restaurant in a Jeep driven by some
ex-Gls in MacDonald's group. We were never told where they found the Jeep.
We visited the American Army cemetery just outside the city of Luxembourg,
where Gen. Patton is buried. The staff there was most courteous and helpful.

We also stopped at a less well-known German cemetery nearby. The crosses
marking the graves of the German soldiers are gray and coarsely hewn -- in
sharp contrast to the graceful white crosses in the American cemetery.
I wondered what the contrast meant in regard to the two cultures.

We spent the night, our last in Luxembourg, at the Bamberg, an old inn on the
Moselle River.

The next day we went to the German military cemetery at Bitburg. We had
trouble finding it because none of the town's citizenry would admit to knowing
where it was. When President Ronald Reagan visited there in 1984, he roused
cries of protest from his critics because along side the graves of regular German
soldiers were the graves of the hated German Stormtroopers, the dreaded SS.
Even in 1984, it seemed strange for an American president to show them
honor.

From Bitburg we drove to Cochem on the Moselle River. We stopped at Burg
Eltz, an ancient castle that looks as if it could have been the setting for the story
of Rapunzel. It even had a high bay window from which she could have let
down her hair.

We stayed along the Rhine that night and arrived at the German-French border
late the next morning. Gasoline was cheaper in Germany than in France, so we
stopped to fill the tank. A vender was selling fruit at the station, and
we bought some to eat in the car. How strange it all seemedI The last time
I crossed the frontier at that place I was engaged in fierce fighting. Now I was
munching on an apple and some grapes while going through a routine check at
a customs gate.

Kapsweyer and Steinfeld, towns important in my division's assault on the
German Siegfried Line, are near the border. Very little seemed familiar to me
as we drove through them. Our tank crew slept in the last house in town in
1944, but I could not find it. We asked a local woman some questions, but she
acted as if she were unaware of her village's significance in the War -- or
she just chose not to remember and thus not have to communicate with us.
We had lunch in a beautiful restaurant in Wissembourg, the courtyard of
which I recognized from 1944. Next we visited the Maginot Line. When I was
there in 1944, I was naively unaware of being right in the middle of the
famous French fortifications.

After a brief stop at a town that I remembered for its having electricity, we
arrived at Niederbronn and checked into the Grand Hotel, a luxury hostelry
and casino. The hotel served as headquarters for the tour group. Ted Perkins,
the group's leader, was most congenial and allowed us to join in all the planned
activities. The town mayor held a reception for us that evening. I was the only
member from the 25th Tank Battalion so was given a little extra applause.
The next day Ted invited us to join the group for a tour of Verdun, the scene of
many German-French conflicts through the centuries and famous as the site
of a great battle during World War I. Verdun turned out to be one of the most
sobering and chilling places we have visited.

Sunday, June 16, we arose early because it was Fathers' Day, and I had several
cards to open. After breakfast in our room we went to mass at the church
across the street from the hotel. During the service I heard our bus engine
warming up, so we left immediately to get aboard. My first impressions of
Hatten and Rittershoffen were much the same as those of Kapsweyer and
Steinfeld. Most of the War-torn towns in Europe have been rebuilt, so there is
little to remind the returning soldier of the havoc and destruction he
remembers.

The bus driver dropped us off near the monument between Hatten and
Rittershoffen. There the American veterans from the American 42nd and 79th
Infantry Divisions assembled with the German 21st Panzer, 25th Panzer
Grenadier, and 7th Parachute Divisions. The United States Army European
Honor Guard added a marshal air; it had participated in all high-level
functions observed by the Army in Europe, the Normandy ceremony attended
by President Reagan among them. The French provided a color guard and
band, and French dignitaries, including a representative of the French Ministry
of Defense, were very much in evidence. A representative from every American
division placed a wreath at the monument. The Germans and French also
placed wreaths. Following the unveiling of the monument, the veterans and
their wives marched into Hatten, where more ceremonies followed. Local
dignitaries spoke, and Americans responded. I was one of the American
veterans given a moment at the podium. General Arnold Burmeister, German
commander at the battle, was the featured speaker of the day. He was eloquent.

The proceedings became more informal after that. The assembly broke into
little groups, and soldiers and civilians from both sides exchanged stories. At
noon the host towns provided Kugelhopf, an Alsatian specialty, and wine
at a lawn party. We were served by pretty girls in native dress. A sumptuous
banquet followed the lawn party, and after the meal the townsfolk presented
memorial gifts to all the American veterans. The people waved and threw
kisses as our bus slowly and carefully made its way through the crowd.

The next day we followed Ted Perkins and his tour group into Rittershoffen.
We left them about mid-morning to try and find the family with whom I spent
Christmas Eve, 1944. With a bit of sleuthing, we did indeed locate them.
Their name is Holzmann. The story of my reunion with the Holtzmanns was
printed in the Liberator. (See Appendix E for the complete text.)

We bade farewell to the Holtzmanns in late morning and had lunch in
Betschdorf. The restaurant was small, so we were able to engage a couple at
the next table in conversation. We asked them if they had attended the
ceremonies in Hatten and Rittershoffen over the weekend. They allowed that
they were from Germany and were not interested in any such observation. We
quickly changed the subject! We asked about the local pottery, for we had seen
several advertisement for Poteries and wanted to buy some of their wares. Our
neighboring diners told us that the really good Alsatian pottery was available in
Soufflenheim and took us there to shop. We found the Soufflenheim pottery
more refined and more artistically decorated than that of Betschdorf. We
bought Kugelhopf forms in three sizes.

Our first stop in France was Rheims, site of Gen. Eisenhower's headquarters.
I was interested in the city for military reasons; yet we made no effort to find
any of the places associated with the War. Instead we visited the famous
Rheims cathedral. The damages it suffered during the War had been repaired.
In fact, it was so fully restored that it is again numbered among the great
cathedrals of France.

The next day, our morning patisserie stop, a ritual, was in Beauvais. When the
French Gothic cathedrals were being built, neighboring sees or bishoprics
competed with one another to claim all manner of superlatives. The bishop of
Beauvais wanted to have the highest choir ceiling of any cathedral in the
world. He and his flock had it for a short time, but it collapsed. So much for
mortal arrogance and prideI The rebuilt church is outstanding nonethelessI

Later in the day we went to Rouen, where Jeanne d'Arc was burned at the stake.
Rouen was another city with a great cathedral.
Claude Monet used the Rouen cathedral as the subject in a series of paintings
portraying the front of the church at different times of the day. We bought
a poster (not a print) of Monet's Kouen Cathedral at Dawn and eventually sent
it to our six-year-old grandson Thal because he read a book about Monet.

We used Bayeux as our headquarters while we were in Normandy. We stayed
in a small downtown pension the first night and a modern hotel the second.
The Bayeux cathedral museum houses the famous Bayeux tapestry, an
embroidered panel depicting the Battle of Hastings in 1066. When American
troops arrived in Bayeux, they found the tapestry displayed around the nave of
the church. It has since been hermetically sealed and placed in the museum.

The D-Day museum in Bayeux has the usual collection of soldiers' gear,
battlefield relics, etc. A small book, Das Evangelium nach Mark [The Gospel
According to St. Mark] was among the personal effects of a fallen German
soldier. My service devotional books had been a prayer book and New
Testament. How ironic that we should have to fight one another!

We saw the German bunkers and gun emplacements on the heights above the
Normandy beaches. Tom and Jan Dalby told of a strange experience they had while visiting the heights above the
beaches. They were in one of the German bunkers overlooking the English Channel when they
heard voices coming from below -- talking German. The people speaking German were
tourists, but Tom said he and Jan had an eerie feeling.

We walked around in shell craters left by the pre-landing
naval bombardment and saw the barbed wire at Point du Hoc. To take the
ground above Omaha Beach, the US Rangers had to scale the cliffs at the Point
and breach the wire. 6 Appropriate to the rules and results of war, there is an
American veterans' cemetery at Normandy.
(Footnote 6: June Johnson grew up on the Isle of Wight, which is located off the south coast of England.
During the War, townspeople were required to house government officials stationed on the
island. Rangers were trained on the cliffs on the south side of the island. When the invasion
began, the person assigned to June's parents' home came home early and appeared very pale.
Very simply he said It has begun! -- meaning, of course, the invasion of the continent.

We toured Mont St. Michel off the Brittany coast and returned to Bayeux for
the night. The next day we drove back to Obernai in Alsace and checked in at
the Gouverneur Hotel. It had a cobblestone courtyard, and the second-floor
rooms opened onto a balcony that went around the entire courtyard. I met
a veteran of the Battle of the Bulge who had fought on the German side. He
was a Pole and had been a forced conscript. He seemed to think that the failure
of the Germans was due entirely to a shortage of gasoline for their armored
vehicles. It makes no difference now, and I told him so. He agreed, and we had
a nice talk.

Obernai is a beautiful city. The Allies destroyed the church steeple and the city
hall clock tower in 1944. Bo_th have been rebuilt to restore the city's old world
charm and feel.

We retraced the path my platoon followed forty years before. I found all of the
important places in Gertwiller immediately, for little had changed. The tavern
in which I sought refuge was closed, but the building was still there. The
garden wall that I vaulted to get away from the hail of bullets in the street still
defined a local burgher's courtyard. The only way to gain access to the
courtyard, then or now, is through the owner's house or over the wall. I used
the latter in 1944, but in 1985 I chose to skip the whole thing. The scene of
the attack on the tanks in Lieut. Tomey's platoon has become a peaceful stretch
of road, and the forest in which the German 88 was hidden is gone.

I took a few pictures, and we headed back to our hotel in Obernai. Spargel, or
white asparagus, was in season in the Rhine._ country when we were there. The
German and Alsatian people consider it a delicacy, and we enjoyed it on several
occasions, one of them being the dinner at in inn in Obernai. The next day,
after a tour of Strasbourg, we moved on into Germany.

I wanted to visit the places where I had been stationed as part of the Army of
Occupation after the War. Toging, first on my list, is east of Munich, so we
spent our first night in Germany in a little inn in Ascheim, a Munich suburb.

Each room was named for a city; ours happened to be the 'Paris' room. Toging
had changed but not a lot. The building I lived in was converted from a school
to a hospital. The large athletic field behind the school was gone, and
a developer had built some houses in its place. The village that we called
Hitler's Baby Farm became a tidy suburb of well-kept houses and gardens. The
Catholic church was new. I did not remember that the old church had been
damaged.

From Toging we drove the few kilometers to Burghausen, the town where
Harvey was assigned for occupation duty. When Harvey lived there, he and
I could go into only part of the ancient fortress, but Ruth and I were able to
tour the entire castle and gro11nds.

We drove on to Erlangen, where we stayed the night. The next day we were in
Bamberg, where our battalion fought, but nothing there looked familiar. We
drove on to Coburg, then to Bayreuth, and finally to Aschaffenburg.

The trip made lasting impressions on both Ruth and me, but we were ready and
relieved to be going home. Ruth felt she knew me better for having seen the
backdrop to a very important part of my life. Perhaps we even gained better
understanding of each other.

In 1989, Tom and Jan Dalby and Ruth and I visited parts of Germany, Austria,
Hungary, and Holland together. Some of the places in Austria and Germany
were a 'return' for me, for I had lived in them after the War.

We flew to Amsterdam and then to Vienna, where we did all the usual tourist
things associated with the city. Sunday morning we attended mass in the
Hofburg Chapel where the Vienna Choir Boys sing every Sunday. Near the end
of the mass we left and hurried to the Spanish Riding School for a performance
of the Lippizaner horses. After touring Eastern Austria and Hungary, we
circled back to Salzburg and that part of the Tyrol in which I spent what
I called my 'salad days' in the Occupation Army. Our hotel was in Anif, where
the opening scene of The Sound of Music was photographed. The Mirabel
Gardens in Salzburg impressed me favorably in 1945, and I have watched the
movie Hopscotch, starring Walter Matthau and Glenda Jackson, several times because the story is set there. The gardens
were as lovely as I remembered them. I looked for the restaurant that had been
a Red Cross Club, where I always stopped for coffee and doughnuts. I could not
find it.

The electric boats that took us out to St. Bartholoma on the Konigsee are the
same ones I rode in 1945, and the boatman gave the same echo demonstration
as he gave then. The lake's environs. however, were much changed. In 1989,
there were many home developments and concessions, and the north shore of
Konigsee had been made into a national park.

On Sunday, Ruth and I drove to Berchtesgaden to worship in the church
I attended as a serviceman. We became involved in a traffic jam, so we parked
the car to see what was happening. A Roman Catholic 'first communion'
celebration was about to begin, and the procession into the Stiftkirche took the
form of a parade. The presentation was impressive and cheerful, but we had to
leave in order to get to the Lutheran church on time for service. The Lutheran
order was formal, stiff, and sober by comparison, and the pastor was the only
person to speak to us afterwards. Perhaps the Protestants felt uneasy about
being a minority in a predominantly Catholic country. Whatever the reason,
the Lutherans seemed to live up to their 'frozen chosen' sobriquet. We
returned to the Catholic church and stayed long enough to witness the priest's
blessing on several of his little lambs.

Following the two church services, Ruth and I went to a downtown restaurant,
where our waitress informed us that the elevator to the Eagle's Nest, Hitler's tea
house atop Mount Kehlstein, was already in operation -- much earlier than
scheduled in the guide books. We hurried back to Anif to pick up the Dalbys,
so they could share in this wonderful bonus experience.
We returned to the United States by way of Amsterdam, where we spent a few
days unrelated to my War experience.

Ruth and I made yet one more nostalgia trip in 1995, the year that marked
the fiftieth anniversary of the Battle of Hatten-Rittershoffen. We thought the
observation might be anti-climactic after the fine fortieth anniversary
observance in 1985, but we chose to go anyway.

We spent some time in Spain, then flew from Madrid to Paris, where we rented
a car and drove to Hagenau in Alsace. Our motel sponsored several 14th
Armored Division parties. Mme. Lisa Pommois, the woman to be credited with
much of the success of the 1985 event, stopped by and joined us for dinner.

The ceremonies in 1995 were similar to those of 1985, but they lasted longer
and involved more people. A Roman Catholic service was held in Hatten,
a Lutheran service in Rittershoffen. The latter, which we attended, was
conducted in French, German, and English. The organist and choir director
was Berthe Holtzmann's daughter-in-law. Several of the Holtzmann clan
looked for us, but they did not find us because we wore no identifying
nametags. Later, when we stopped at the Holtzmann house, we found the
entire clan ready and waiting for our arrival!

The dinner reflected the best of
French cuisine. The Holtzmanns invited us to return the next day.
The observation included a very moving dedication of a memorial to the eighty
civilians from Hatten and Rittershoffen who were killed in the battle. The
towns are small, so every victim was surely known by everyone who survived.

Most of the Holtzmann family attended the noontime dinner at Berthe's house
the next day. The meal was wonderful again, and everyone was animated. We
communicated in German, English, and sign language. Otto's wife took us on
a town tour in the afternoon. Many displays in the museum had to do with the
War. The children in the public school made a series of murals depicting
Rittershoffen's history; several of the scenes emphasized the battle.

Late in the afternoon, Ruth and I went west into the area in which I fought in
the Battle of the Lower Vosges. The country is mountainous and covered by
dense forests. I gained new understanding of just how difficult the work of
Task Force Hudelson must have beenI

We wanted to visit the railroad car in which the 1917 Armistice was signed,
but the car, also the site of Hitler's gloating acceptance of France's surrender in
1940, was moved to Compiegne and later blown up when Hitler thought it
might be used for Germany's surrender after World War II. The building on
the site of the 1917 Armistice signing now contains a replica of the original
car.

We returned to Madrid, where we saw Picasso's Guernica in the Queen Sofia
Arts Center. The painting is Picasso's reaction to the bombing of Guernica,
which Generalissimo Francisco Franco allowed as target practice for the
German Luftwaffe during the Spanish Civil War. The painting, one of Picasso's
best-known works, depicts grotesque figures in the throes of agony.

Our last War-related stop was near the El Escorial, the royal pantheon
containing the tombs of Spanish monarchs. Only a few kilometers away,
marked by a huge cross on a mountain, is The Valley of the Fallen, burial place
for 43,000 soldiers from both sides in the Spanish Civil War, with its basilica
hewn into a mountain of granite.

In the years between 1977 and 1996, I made five trips to Europe that would
qualify as a soldier's return. Ruth accompanied me on all of them. I sincerely
believe that reliving some of my wartime experience and occupation duty gave
me a better comprehension and a deeper appreciation of the magnitude of
World War II and the sacrifices made by so many people, both military and
civilian. Ruth and I surely came to a new level of wonder at the price paid for
the liberty we so often take for granted.

Dr. Malcolm Muir closed his last lecture at the Elderhostel in Tennessee by
acknowledging the veterans of World War II for their contribution towards
that liberty, for, as he said, "Two of the most evil powers history has ever
known were Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan. Had they been successful in
their war effort, the world would have been plunged into darkness for two
hundred years." My feelings after resurrecting my experience as a solider,
a bearer of arms for the cause of my country in World War II, are best
expressed in three words I saw scrawled in chalk on a wall in the midst of
a pile of rubble in Augsburg. Not too surprisingly, they are the same words
spoken to me by a German Panzer officer as he and I shook hands at the
Rittershoffen monument in 1985. May they remain the hope of every new
generation!

Kein Krieg Wehr

No More War

Appendices:

Amen and Amen (Psalm 89:52, KJV)

Appendix B: 14th Armored Division, the Liberator Division

The 14th Armored Division was activated on November 15, 1942, with
Headquarters at Camp Chaffee, Arkansas. Elements of the division were called
upon to save lives and property in May of 1943 during a terrible flood along
the Arkansas River.

After participating in the 1943-1944 Tennessee maneuvers, the division had
one change of station -- to Camp Campbell, Kentucky -- before embarking for
the European Theater in October of 1944.

On October 29, 1944, the 14th became the first division to disembark at the
Port of Marseilles, and two weeks later elements of the division were
maintaining defensive positions along the French-Italian frontier. After
assembling in the vicinity of Rambervillers, on November 21, the division
launched an attack through the Vosges Mountains to eliminate and trap
German forces in this region. By December 4, the 14th had fought its way to
the Alsatian Plain and had captured Gertwiller, Benfield, and Barr, breaking the
backbone of the German defenses. After four days of hard fighting, the men
of the division crossed the Lauter River, entered Germany on December 16, and
battered their way into the outer defenses of the Siegfried Line.

The 14th was given a brief rest but on Christmas Day was sent to defend a long
sector of the front running south from Bitche to Neunhofen, as elements from
the Seventh Army were sent north to help meet the German counterattack in
the Bulge. On New Year's Day, 1945, the Germans launched an attack down
the Saar Valley through Bitche, and the 14th Division lines were badly bent by
the force of the enemy attack but held to stop the enemy drive.

After the failure of the Bitche attack, the Germans attempted to break through
to Strasbourg at Hatten and Rittershoffen, and the 14th was once again called
upon to halt the enemy in a series of bitter actions which took place starting
January 12. Fighting against positions in the old Maginot Line, across icy
plains, and through the rubble of destroyed cities, the 14th slugged it out with
three German divisions for ten days in what became known as one of the
greatest defensive battles of World War IL

On January 20, the enemy forces began withdrawing, and the division was
given a rest and assigned to defensive positions during February and early
March. On March 15, the division was back on the attack and drove across the
Moder River, cracked the Siegfried Line, and captured Germersheim on the
Rhine River. The Rhine was crossed at Worms on Easter Sunday, April 1. At
Hammerburg, the division freed four thousand Allied Prisoners Of War before
turning southeast to cross the Main River at Lichtenfels in order to cut the
Niirnberg-Bayreuth Autobahn.

The 14th continued to drive into southern Germany, crossed the Danube at
Ingolstadt, liberated the Moosburg Prison Camp where 110,000 Allied
prisoners from all nations were interned, and crossed the Isar River.

A concentration camp and three slave labor camps were overrun at Ampfing,
and elements of the division accepted surrender of the enemy air wing
controlling jet aircraft operations in Germany. The 14th established
bridgeheads across the Inn River at Jettenbach and Muhldorf before being
relieved on May 3 for occupation duties, which continued until the division
returned home for inactivation in September of 1945.

During two campaigns and 167 days of combat, the men of the Liberator
Division had freed an esti:inated 200,000 Allied Prisoners Of War and an
additional 250,000 slave laborers and displaced persons with a loss of 2,690
killed and wounded.

The 14th Armored Division's nickname as the Liberator Division was wellearned
and appropriate.

Appendix E: Christmas Eve, 1944, by Albert William Kratzke
as printed in the Liberator, Volume 23, No. 1, spring, 1988, beginning on page 6

I should like to share with our readers an interesting and poignant story. It
begins on Christmas Eve, 1944, and continues to the present. In fact, it is still
unfolding.

Those of you who have a copy of the memorial book that Mme. Lisa Pommois
prepared for the fortieth anniversary of the Hatten-Rittershoffen battle may
recall that in one of the articles Berthe Holtzmann recounts that 14th Armored
Division soldiers billeted in her home shared Christmas Eve, 1944, with her
and her three children. She says that some of the men even sang German
carols. I was the one of the five in our tank crew who knew the German songs.
Our story, Berthe's and mine, of what happened after Christmas Eve is recorded
below.

We did indeed sing carols -- Stille Nacht, O Tannenbaum, etc. We also shared
our Christmas treats. Berthe had some German cookies, which she brought out
and served. The Christmas tree was sparsely decorated, but unlike many other
households in the town, her family had one. It was lighted with real candles,
probably a terrible fire hazard, and I remember that the children, two boys and
a girl, wondered at the sight. We were comfortably quartered that night.

As we went about our mission, which included a return to Rittershoffen several
weeks after Christmas, I often wondered what happened to the family. I only
learned of their fate forty years later.

In June of 1985, my wife Ruth and I went to the Hatten-Rittershoffen fortieth
anniversary observation. Ted Perkins graciously allowed us to join his tour
group as 'tagalongs,' and on the Monday following the official ceremonies his
group went to Rittershoffen. We followed in our rented car and visited sites
with members of the group. When they left in mid-morning, Ruth and
I remained in Rittershoffen to seek out the family with whom I spent Christmas
Eve, 1944.

The only identification I could recall was the little girl's name: her mother and
brothers called her Annelies. I asked an older man on the street if he knew
anyone named Annelies who would be about forty-five years old. He and a lady
who came onto the scene responded immediately that it had to be Annelies
Holtzmann, sister of Otto and Alfred. They said she had married and now lived
in another town.

News travels fast, and it did not take long for the mayor's secretary, who
happened to be Otto's wife, to get onto the phone to let everyone know we were
in town. Soon Berthe and Madeleine, Berthe's second daughter born after the
War, appeared in the town hall square.

A happy reunion! Berthe remembered me for my blonde hair. (I am blonde
still, even in my sixties, though I have less hair than I had the first time Berthe
and I met). Berthe said I hung a Christmas card onto her tree.

It was one happy extended family! who gathered around the Holtzmann
kitchen table for a glass of Schnapps that day we came together. They offered
us the rest of the bottle, and had we still been part of a group we may have
accepted it. However, I had memories of home-made 'white lightning' and
thought it best to decline.

We sang Die Lorelei and some other German songs. Before we left, Otto,
a wood carver, insisted on giving us a miniature harvest fork and flail as
present. Later that day we purchased an Alsatian doll, which we named -- What
else? -- Annelies. When we returned to Seattle, we sent Berthe's
granddaughter Patty a Seattle T-shirt and the family some of my color
photographs of Northwest mountains and seashores. Patty wrote a note that
began with a French Merci ... while her grandmother's acknowledgment started
with a German Danke schon.

We still correspond. In one of my letters I asked Berthe what happened to her
and her family during those bitter days of January, 1945, and from then until
the end of the War. She responded with a letter that must have been difficult
for her to write. I asked her if she would mind if I shared her letter with the
readers of the Liberator. She agreed to have it printed, and my translation of
her letter follows. In order to preserve the feelings expressed in Berthe's
writing, I have made only a simple translation with no attempt to put her
writing into colloquial English.

Dear Kratzke Family,

I received your kind letter with the good wishes. I am
pleased that you have thought of me again. I wish you
and yours the best in the New Year - happiness, health,
and God's blessings. Many thanks for the pictures of your
lovely grandchildren. In the summer we shall take
pictures of us, too, so that you might learn to know our
whole family.

You have already met our Patricia Emma
Holtzmann. Otto's children are Freddy Otto, Cathy
Caroline, and Christine Michele Holtzmann. Annelies'
children are Remy Albert and Jackie Robert Stumpf. The
family lives in Roppenheim, a village on the Rhine.
Madeleine's children are Erick Robert, Christopher Charles,
and Sylvia Corine Graff.

I shall never forget Christmas of 1944. I did not
know where my husband was. It was a sad time. We had
no lights, and there were soldiers everywhere. I wanted to
make things pleasant for the children, but unfortunatety
there were no gifts.

The night before the holiday I sat down at my
sewing machine and sewed them some things. I set up a
small carbide lamp and brought the machine up close.

We surety did not know what lay before us. Constantly
I thank God that we survived.
What I have written in the Memorial Book is not
nearly all that we experienced. With half frozen feet we
wandered here and there and never knew where we were.
We were often near death, even though we were away from
the batttle.

Once we were almost smothered when a truck with
a trailer took us to Germany. Once we sat in an inn, where
someone gave us something to eat. When the town was
bombed, we were scarcely out on the street when the entire
building fell in and the innkeeper lay dead under the
ruins. At a collection point we were able to wash out our
eyes, but we had very little water and onty one pocket
handkerchief for six peopte.

Then we were transported by railroad. The snow was
fifty centimeters deep, and the train was full of snow and
ice. The toilets were frozen. It was dreadful. We had to
climb over a bank in order to find a clean place. Often the
train stood still for a long time because the depots were
being bombed. We didn't know where we were being
taken. The train atways moved in pitch-black night.

Finally, we arrived in Ulm. From there we went on to
an encampment where there was a long hall which was
nice and warm. But it was so full that most or the people
had to sit on the floor. Until then we had not wept - not
even the children during the battles - because we were so
numbed by fear, anxiety, and cold. Then the tears began
to flow as a refined lady sang a German song to her
daughter. It was as if we were back in my homeland, that
dear country. All the people in the hall cried and cried.

Then in a horse-drawn sled we came to a small
farming town. Someone gave us a large room with two
beds, and we could finally get clean again. It was the best
time in our travels.  The skin over our whole bodies was
completely broken out from the dirt and cold. We did not
know our own faces, and our hair was full of soot and dirt.
The people brought us potatoes and apples and also warm
clothes, which I then made over for us.

We helped the people by working and thus earned
our bread. Alfred had to deliver milk from an old lady to
the dairy, and thereby we received our milk for nothing.
My mother knitted stockings from old wool remnants that
were in tatters. Alfred went to school, and Otto went to
kindergarten. 'Annefisfe,' as the people caffed her, simply
would not go with the strange children. She understood
but would not speak. Instead, she went to an old lady,
who would give her bread and butter and sometimes
something sweet.

We were able to recover a little, but then the War
came there. We had air raid alarms two or three times
a day and also in the night. Again we sat in cellars and
foxholes. We asked ourselves, "Must we experience yet
another battle?" There were no more big battles, but we
were still being fired upon. The town was occupied. It was
plundered and the women violated. At that time the
soldiers were not so decent to us as you were.

Once more we came away with our lives. Our
guardian angel had not forsaken us. But then I became
very ill with a gall bladder infection. The doctor could not
help me because there was no medicine in the pharmacy.
At that time the military situation was at a standstill,
and we could not return home. I lay in bed and
deteriorated.

We could first return home in early June. The trip
was very difficult and full of obstacles. In Strasbourg we
learned that my husband was already released from
captivity, and that was a joy. Then we lived in wooden
barracks in Rittershqffen. There our Madeleine entered the
wodd in 1947. We lived very frugally.

We had to start all over again. We had to buy a cow
and beds and furniture. Neverthetess, we were lucky
because we were all together. In 1951, we were able to move
into our new house.  Finally, we could live normal lives
again. Thank God far that!

In the summer we took a beautiful trip along the
Rhine, and when we passed the Lorelei Rock the music
played "Ich weiss nicht was soll es bedeuten."
Frau Ruth sang that song so beautifully in our kitchen.

Now I shall close. Frau Ruth will need a great deal
of patience to transtate this long letter.

With heartfelt greetings to your whole family,

Berthe Hottzmann

While on occupation duty in Toging, Bavaria, we witnessed the plight of the
Displaced Persons at a DP camp at the edge of town, but I never knew a DP
personally.

If any other member of that Christmas Eve group happens to read this article, I
should like to hear from him. Eddie Berg died of wounds sustained in April,
1945. The others in the crew were John Donges, Carl Phillips, and George
Johnson.

For that matter, if anyone else from the 25th Tank Battalion is interested in
these events, I hope he will contact me as well.


Appendix L: Address of Brigadier General John K. Rice

Resume of final address as delivered in the name of Brigadier General John K. Rice,
Commanding General of Camp McCoy, to each group of soldiers as they were
separated from the military service:

On this occasion, your last formation as members of the Armed Forces, it is
fitting that you should receive the following message from the commanding
general of this separation center.

You are being discharged from the Army today -- from your Army. It is
your Army because your skill and your patriotism, your labor and courage and
devotion have been some of the· factors which make it great. You have been a
member of the finest military team in history. You have accomplished miracles in
battle and supply. Your country is proud of you, and you have every right to be
proud of yourselves.

You have seen, in the lands where you worked and fought and where many
of your comrades died, what happens when the people of a nation lose interest in
their government. You have seen what happens when they follow false leaders.
You have seen what happens when a nation accepts hate and intolerance.
We all are determined that what happened in Europe and in Asia must not
happen to our country.

Back in civilian life you will find that your generation will
be called upon to guide our country's destiny. Opportunity for leadership is yours.
The responsibility is yours. The nation which depended on your courage and
stamina to protect it from its enemies now expects you as individuals
to claim your
right of leadership, a right which you earned honorably and which is well
deserved.

Start being a leader as soon as you put on your civilian clothes. If you see
intolerance and hate, speak out against them. Make your individual voices heard,
not for selfish things, but for honor and decency among men, for the rights of all
people.

Remember, too, that no American can afford to be disinterested in any part
of his government, whether it is county, city, state, or nation.
Choose your leaders wisely -- that is the way to keep ours the country for
which you fought. Make sure that those leaders are determined to maintain peace
throughout the world. You know what war is. You know that we must not have
another. As individuals you can prevent it if you give to the task which lies ahead
the same spirit which you displayed in uniform.

Accept that trust and the challenge which it carries. I know that the people
of America are counting on you. I know that you will not let them down.
Good-bye to each and every one of you, and to each and every one of you,
good luck!


Plaque on Memorial, Pictured at End of memoirs

TO HONOR, FOR ETERNITY,

THOSE GALLANT SOLDIERS,

WHO SERVED, FOUGHT, AND

DIED, TO PRESERVE DEMOCRACY

25TH TANK Battalion

LT. COL. ERNEST C. WATSON, CMDG.

VOSGES MTS.-ALSACE (RITTERSHOFFEN)-Bitche

SALIENT-SIEGFREID LINE (STEINFELD)-Bavaria







