Chapter XV: A Tale of Two Cities (and a Few More)
The Mountains shall bring peace to the people (Psalm 71:3, KJV)

Sometime in mid-October, I was issued a pass to go to Paris and London. I went
with Dan Delacourt, whom I did not know very well. We were in the same
unit because of the points system. Dan turned out to be a nice guy and a good
traveling companion.

Dan and I arrived in Munich towards evening and stayed overnight in sleeping
quarters in the railroad station maintained by the Army for soldiers passing
through. The train we took the next morning was slow, and our coach was old
and poorly heated. We carried sleeping bags, which we used to keep warm
even in the daytime. The train stopped in Augsburg for about an hour.
I got off and walked around the area near the station; there the ever-present
Red Cross girls were dispensing doughnuts and coffee.

A scene on the loading platform caught my attention. There were several
young German men in Army uniform. They were all incapacitated in some
way. One of them had only one leg and was quite awkward on his crutches.
Another had a dangling empty sleeve. Very likely they had just been released
from some hospital or rehabilitation center and had not yet been home -- or
they would not have been in uniform. The German people ignored them
or ridiculed them to the point of being cruel. I cannot imagine what their
motives could have been. Perhaps the civilians were angry at the soldiers for
having lost the War. Finally another American and I helped the fellow on
crutches get onto his train. The people on the platform turned their backs and
disappeared.

At some stop in France, I sold a carton of Raleigh cigarettes to a man at the
station. I wanted some more French money for our stay in Paris. Raleighs were
the least popular cigarettes among American soldiers. The Frenchman either
did not know or did not care. He may have sold them for quite a bit more than
he paid me. There was always a thriving black market in sugar, coffee, and
American cigarettes.

We arrived in Paris at Gare du Nord [North Railroad Station] the next day. We
inquired about housing at an American Red Cross desk in the station. The lady
at the desk directed us to the Red Cross club in the city. The club was in a large
building complex used to house soldiers on furlough. We took the Metro
[subway] without any difficulty. Americans in uniform rode the Metro free of
charge. The main Red Cross building was full, so we stayed in a little "pension" across the street.
A pension is a small hotel, usually without a lobby and sometimes without an
elevator.
We were lucky because the accommodations in the main
building were like a 'Y.' Our room was elegant by comparison, and it offered
much more privacy. It had its own bath including a bidet, something new to
both Dan and me. We ate most of our meals in the main building. Whenever
we were away from our quarters at meal time, we ate off the street. We tried
not to eat street fare because the French had little food to spare. The
restaurants offered only a meager menu.

We hit many of the popular tourist sights of Paris. High points of our visit
included the Eiffel Tower (a high point!), the Madeleine (a church that looks like a Greek
temple), the Pantheon, the Arch of Triumph and Champs-Elysees, the Paris
Opera, the Louvre, the Sacre-Coeur Basilica, the Notre Dame Cathedral, and the
Montmartre section of the city. The places that impressed me the most were
the Louvre and Notre Dame Cathedral.

The Louvre was awesome. I had never visited a world-famous museum before.
Many of the art works were hidden during the War and were still in storage,
but the 'biggies' were on display -- Mona. Lisa.7 Winged Victory of Sa.mothra.ce7
and Venus de Milo among them. 3 Winged Victory, also known as Nike7 stands
in a spectacular setting on a stair landing near one of the Louvre entrances. 4 It
is a huge piece of statuary not easily moved, so it probably was not put away
during the War.
Notre Dame de Paris Cathedral is famous for many reasons. It is not the oldest
of the French Gothic cathedrals, nor does it have the greatest art glass. Neither
is it the largest. Those distinctions belong to other famous French churches,
e.g. Chartres, Rheims, Rouen, Amiens, etc. But Notre Dame is Notre Dame,
and it is and always will be regarded as the epitome of French Gothic
architecture.

At the time I thought of Notre Dame as a Catholic university in South Bend,
Indiana, or the setting for The Hunchback of Notre Dame. Victor Hugo's
wonderful tale of Quasimodo, the deformed dwarf who lived in one of the
cathedral's towers. During my high school and college days, Notre Dame was
a football team Protestants loved to hate.

Our guide at the cathedral spoke English. I suppose English-speaking persons
were chosen to take people through because most of the tourists were American
soldiers. I had been in many old churches during the War. Every village had
two, one Catholic and the other Lutheran. Even the grandest of them did not
prepare me for Notre Dame. It was unlike anything that I had ever seen. The
guide did a good job of showing us around. To me the huge rose window was
the cathedral's most impressive feature. It was removed and hidden during the
War, but, fortunately for us, it had been reinstalled by the time we visited Paris.
We were disappointed that we could not go up into either of the towers.

The Notre Dame guide told an interesting story -- perhaps apocryphal, perhaps
true. He said that the church had an interesting custom. When a cardinal
died, his red hat was suspended from the cathedral ceiling by a string. When
the string decayed or broke and the hat fell, the soul of the deceased cardinal
left purgatory. When Cardinal Richelieu, an unpopular French cardinal during
the reign of Louis XIII, died, his hat was suspended by a wire.

We wanted to go to the top of the Eiffel Tower. The tower had been closed
during the War and was just being reopened. The elevator had not yet been
put back into service, but we were allowed to climb the steps to the first level.
We ate at the restaurant there. The food wasn't great, but the view was
spectacular.

It was expected of every visiting GI that he see one of the two famous Parisian
shows, the Folies Bergere or the Casino de Paris. We did not get to either one.
Many of the Gls staying at. the Red Cross club spoke of their visits to these
burlesque shows and said they were very good.

After about a week in Paris, we caught a train for the coast. The English
Channel can be very stormy during the autumn and winter months. It was
now early November, and the weather was terrible. Because of the foul
weather we had to wait several days before boarding a ferry. The Red Cross
and the American Army Special Services maintained a hotel for detained
travelers in the small town of Etretat. With the crashing of the surf, we could
hear the detonation of mines being washed ashore. The explosions were
especially disturbing to those of us who had been in combat. Many of the
soldiers reacted by bounding out of bed and throwing themselves flat on
the floor.

After a few days, we caught a railroad ferry bound for Portsmouth. The
weather was still bad when we left, and the trip was rough. The ferry was
much like our Puget Sound ferries except that instead of transporting cars, the
ferry carried trains. The ends were closed while at sea. I always believed that
an ocean-going vessel was safe because of its several compartments: if one
compartment took on water, the other compartments would keep it afloat.
When I saw that our rail ferry had only one big open compartment, my faith
was a little shaken. But our ferry made it to the English Coast without incident.

Upon landing, we took a train to London, where we stayed at the Red Cross
club in Grosvenor Square, right across the street from the United States
embassy. Gen. Eisenhower's headquarters were in Grosvenor Square before the
invasion, and many members of his staff lived in the same building that now
housed the Red Cross club. The desk clerk was a beautiful English-speaking
girl. I wanted to ask her for a date immediately, just like every other GI who
registered at that desk, but a big sign on the wall behind the check-in counter
strongly advising against asking Red Cross girls to go out dissuaded me. I know
for a fact that there were violations of the rule, but I went along with it.

By the time we were assigned our quarters, it was early evening and already too
late to go anywhere. So I went down to the public rooms, where an extremely
interesting ping pong match was in progress. A Red Cross lady was playing
a soldier. She was ambidextrous, so she could toss her paddle from one hand to
the other and hit the ball equally well with either. She won.

I met a Scotsman in the lobby and tried to engage him in conversation. He was
willing to talk, but his Scottish burr was so thick I could hardly understand
him. He was from some important regiment, and his uniform was very
colorful. I also met a staff sergeant in a line company of the American 1st
Infantry Division, the 'Big Red One,' so-called because the division's patch
had a big red "1" on it. The unusual thing about him was that
he landed in North Africa in 1942 and was in every battle that his division
fought -- and he never suffered so much as an abrasion!

After breakfast at the Red Cross club, we set out to see London. We could ride
the underground, called the 'tube,' and surface buses for a very little fare. On
the first day we visited Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament, which
we found impressive. I was not quite so awed by the brighter, more inviting
Westminster Abbey as I was by Notre Dame. English Gothic and French Gothic
are different architectural styles, but I really did not have a preference. I saw
little bomb damage in public buildings, and Big Ben was working just fine.

That night we went to a dance for servicemen. I learned the hokey pokey, to
and the English girls wanted to do that dance all night.
(Footnote 10: June Johnson, our friend from England, remembers the hokey pokey.
End Footnote)

Early during our stay in London we ate wherever we slept. Then one day an
Englishman told us of a small restaurant that served steaks and fresh
vegetables. We tried it, liked it, and went back several times. The steaks,
rumored to be horse meat, were a little tough, but we ate them anyway. The
fresh tomatoes could not be faked.

We did not see so many of the tourist attractions as we might have seen. Parts
of London were still nothing but rubble. Dan and I spent a lot of time loafing
and going to movies. Engli,sh theaters allowed smoking, so we always tried to
sit low to avoid the pall of smoke. The movie that I liked the most was One
Hundred Men and a Girl; it starred Deanna Durbin.

Dan and I wanted to go to Scotland. I had been told at my company
headquarters that travel arrangements for trips into Scotland or Ireland had to
be made in London. We were not successful in getting pass extensions to go
to Scotland. Perhaps there ·was a quota system that depended on how many
American soldiers the hostelries and eateries could accommodate. At any rate
we could not go.

As a second choice, we elected to go to Ireland. In order to get a pass extension
to travel to Ireland, the applicant had to convince the issuing officer that he
had a relative or friend that he wanted to visit. Dan's last name was Delacourt
and Delacourt sounded Irish enough for him to get the extension -- but
Kratzke?! I talked my way past the officer in charge of pass extensions and
traveled as Dan's companion. I didn't even try to pose as an Irishman!

We went by rail to Holyhead, Wales, and there caught a ferry for Dublin. I was
standing at a bar on the ferry when the ship lurched violently to one side and
then righted itself as fast as it had reeled over. The bar drinks slid down to the
end of the bar, and all of us standing there grabbed whatever came flying by.
Many of the passengers ran up to the deck to find out what was going on. The
captain was averting mines. One of the crewmen fired his rifle from the stern
and managed to detonate one of them. The ferry ride turned out to be more
exciting and dangerous than we had bargained for!

It was late at night when we finally docked in Dublin. We were directed to a
house not far from the center of town. Four of us shared a cab, and soon we
arrived at our lodging. It was what would now be called a bed and breakfast.
The house was very nice and must have been the home of a wealthy
professional person. Six of us shared a large upstairs bedroom. It might have
been a sitting room in another day, for it had a fireplace. Although it was near
midnight when we arrived, we were told that the cook would prepare a meal of
steak, eggs, potatoes, and fresh tomatoes if we wanted it. We opted for
a sandwich and went to bed. Our breakfast the next morning was the huge
meal that we had been offered the night before .

In a complete contrast to London, Dublin was untouched by the War and
bustled with activity. The restaurants had ample fresh meat and produce. We
stayed inside Dublin for our sightseeing because there seemed to be no
convenient way to visit the surrounding countryside. Two of the well-known
tourist attractions in Dublin are the Book of Kells at Trinity college and Dublin
Castle. We missed both of them, more out of ignorance than for lack of time or
inconvenience of location.

The people of Dublin were extremely friendly. A serviceman in an American
uniform was admitted to just about anything the city had to offer for very little
cost. By contrast, English servicemen dared not wear their uniforms at all
because the Irish considered the presence of one English soldier on Irish soil
tantamount to a British armed invasion -- and the soldier could be shot.
One rainy afternoon we went to see Marco Polo, a film starring Gary Cooper,
but the other days we spent walking about the city, taking in whatever sights
there might be. I was appalled by some of the street scenes. The Irish are very
emotional, so street demonstrations were common. Panhandlers were
everywhere. Seeing a mother nursing her infant and begging at the same time
came as a rude awakening for this sheltered Midwestern country boy.

In Ireland, custom officials searched travelers both entering and leaving the
country, so Dan and I had to pass through customs twice. The officials were
especially strict with people going out of Ireland. Every English person was
thoroughly searched. The wall behind the service counter had a shelf full of
whiskey and other spirits confiscated from English citizens. An American in
uniform was not even questioned: we could have taken anything we wanted out
of the country. An Englishman, perhaps a soldier in civilian clothes,
approached Dan and asked him to carry a bottle of Irish whiskey onto the ferry
and then return it when we were at sea. Dan declined.

Once back in London we went back to the Red Cross club and prepared to
return to France. Again we were delayed a few days by the bad weather in the
English Channel. We had no convenient way to notify our outfit of our
situation, so we just waited until the weather cleared and then boarded the
ferry. On one of the decks I saw an interesting poker game played by only two
players. They were playing five-card stud, which usually requires at least four
or five players to be a good game. The two soldiers were playing with nothing
but £ (one pound) notes. I I The game was very fast. When we reached the
harbor in France, they were about even.
(Footnote 11: A £ was worth about $4.00 in 1945, which is about $30.00 in 1997. End Footnote)

We had a few more days in Paris before we had to return to Germany. I had
been gone more than a month on a two-week pass.

Chapter XVI: Winter in the Bavarian Alps

At the end of my 'grand tour' of Paris, London, and Dublin, I had to come back
to reality. I had a wonderful trip! I returned in late November, but I cannot
recall where I spent Thanksgiving. (Foreign countries do not observe the
holiday.)

When we arrived in Munich, Dan and I had trouble finding our respective
units. In the month that we were gone, each of us had been transferred, not to
the same unit. Because of my discharge points, I was transferred to the 774th
Tank Battalion stationed in a small town south of Munich. I don't remember
where Dan went.

I knew only one person in my new unit, Ray 'Shorty' Fisher. He had been
a driver for one of the tanks in the Assault Gun Platoon.
Time passed slowly because everyone was awaiting discharge. We had no
specific duties, so we read a lot and played poker and blackjack. The weather
was cold and rainy, so we didn't do much sightseeing.

I had been in the 774th only a few weeks when I was transferred to the
XX Corps Artillery, which was stationed in Berchtesgaden. I had visited
Berchtesgaden during my Bad Reichenhall stay, so I was familiar with the
pretty town and its surroundings. I was pleased to be going there.

Because unit assignment was made according to number of points and not
according to Military Occupation Specialty number, the usual functions of
a unit were seldom carried out. There were very few artillerymen in the
XX Corps Artillery, and those few were there by accident, not by design. To
keep troop morale as high as possible and to preserve some semblance of order,
each unit had to find something for each person to do. At first I ran the Post
Exchange, a servicemen's store that sold cigarettes, candy, etc. The PX was
located in a small storefront across the street from one of the Catholic churches
in downtown Berchtesgaden. My duties were simple. The systems for keeping
books and inventory accounting had been set up by someone else, so I just had
to see that the store was run honestly. I was required to make a regular report
to the Special Services group that ran all the PXs in the area. Several girls from
the Women's Army Corps worked for me. They waited on customers, stocked
shelves, etc. They, too, were just biding time, awaiting shipment home.

The PX job didn't last long. The mail clerk was transferred, so I applied for and
was given his job. I had to :v.iake a daily trip to Salzburg with the outgoing mail
and pick up the incoming mail. Except when I had to drive in bad weather, my
job was very nice. I was not assigned any particular vehicle, so every day
I went to the motor pool and picked up whatever was available. More often
than not I got a Jeep, but occasionally I was given a command car, a somewhat
larger vehicle. Sometimes I carried passengers -- people who had made prior
arrangements to catch rides -- like organized hitchhiking.

One day I was to take a civilian couple from the Post Hotel in Berchtesgaden to
their hotel in Salzburg. They were a dual vaudeville team working the United
Service Organization circuit. They needed quite a bit of luggage for their props
and such. I happened to have an open command car that day, and the weather
was cold and clear. The couple did not mind at all: they were bundled up and
stayed warm.

There were two routes to Salzburg. One was faster but less interesting. It
involved going down a steep hill, which could be treacherous if there were ice
on the roads. The other was safer and more scenic but took longer. The day
I carried the show business passengers I gave them the scenic tour. They were
enthralled by the beauty of the countryside.

My daily trips to Salzburg were interesting and fun. I always dropped the
outgoing mail at the Army Post Office on the way into town. Then I would go
to the Red Cross canteen on the Mozartplatz, one of the main squares of the
city, for coffee and doughnuts. I learned much about the city by watching and
listening. Just being in Salzburg was a pleasure.

Some WACs stationed in Berchtesgaden started a little library on the second
floor of a downtown building. First they got permission to use the space; then
they scrounged around and found some semi-attractive furniture to make it
into a comfortable reading room. They added some English language books and
American periodicals for the servicemen. With a ping pong table in an
adjacent room, the library became an enlisted man's social club. I spent many
evenings there.

The music and drama scene in Salzburg provided another opportunity for
entertainment and socializing. I attended several concerts that winter. General
Mark Clark was at one of these. He had a box in the center of the balcony, and
the orchestra sounded the appropriate Ruffles and Flourishes to usher him to
his seat. The musicians were all Austrian or German, so very likely they did
not understand the significance of the piece they were playing.

Whenever I wanted transportation for myself, I tried to get a closed vehicle.
Jeeps were always open, but some of the command cars had canvas side
curtains to make them a little ·warmer. I had a Jeep the night I went to the
concert that Gen. Clark attended. It was a cold night, and I had a date. I told
the girl to dress warmly, but she did not understand just how cold an open Jeep
could be! Apparently I did not make much of an impression on her, for even
though the concert was good, she never went out with me again. She probably
found some GI with a closed car.

Some of the troops stationed in Berchtesgaden lived in the Berchtesgadner Hof,
a posh hotel taken over by the Army. The back of the hotel faced the Alps, so
the rooms on that side and the dining patio commanded a beautiful view of
Mount Watzmann, the highest mountain in that region of the Bavarian Alps.
I stayed at the Hof for only a short time because I was among those who had to
leave to make room for some visiting dignitaries from the Nurnberg War
Crimes Trials during their Christmas recess. Justice Robert Jackson, who
headed the tribunal that conducted the trials, was an American Supreme Court
judge, and when his entire contingent chose to spend the holidays in
Berchtesgaden, he used his clout to have them registered at the Berchesgadner
Hof, the best hotel in town.
(Footnote 1: The Berchtesgadener Hof is still a Rest and Recreation center for American troops stationed
in Germany.
End Footnote)

My next room was in a dormitory made into a barrack. It was on the XX Corps
Artillery Headquarters grounds. The headquarters office, mail room, mess hall
and motor pool were all convenient. My roommate was Eugene O'Grady.
Gene had a Fraulein in town, so I had a private room most of the time. Gene
slept in our room, his official quarters, only when there was something
important like inspection the next morning.

One day I was approached by Horst and Wolfgang, boys about thirteen or
fourteen years old, who asked if their mother could wash my clothes. They also
offered to work for me for very little compensation. I accepted on both counts.
Their mother did my laundry very nicely, and the boys ran errands and
polished my boots. But I could never got them to arrange my things in the
manner specified by the United States Army. According to US regulations,
boots are lined up under one's bed with the toes out. In the German Army,
a soldier's boots are placed under his bed with the heels out -- and these boys
still followed the German dictate. I always managed to correct their mistakes
before inspection.

A lot of fellows had German girl friends, so Gene's sleeping in town was not
unusual. The Army should have done something to discourage the practice, but
who would blow the whistle when many officers were doing the same thing?
One day a full colonel ordered an enlisted man to deliver a load of firewood to
a certain civilian. The enlisted man was suspicious, so he checked out the
house. A pretty girl answered his knock, and he heard the colonel's voice
commg from another room. The enlisted man spoke loudly enough for the
colonel to recognize his voice. The enlisted man left, and the colonel never said
another word to him about the incident.

Once the motor pool people came to lunch in the mess hall and announced
excitedly that they had a big armor-plated Mercedes that once belonged to
Hermann Goering, head of the Luftwaffe, parked in the compound. Everyone gathered around the
car, and one of the motor pool sergeants offered to drive people around
the parking lot. I rode in the Mercedes a few minutes. I had seen pictures of
Hitler's automobile, and his and Goering's cars looked very much alike.
Another automobile that found its way into our motor pool was a German
Horch, later renamed the Audi. "Horch" comes from the German word "to hear" and
"Audi" comes from the Latin word "to hear."  The car was an oddity to us
Americans because it used charcoal for
fuel. A contraption that looked like a water heater was mounted vertically on
the left side of the rear bumper. German fuel went for airplanes, tanks, and
other front line vehicles, so some clever engineers improvised and built the
charcoal burner for use in civilian automobiles. The burner probably ruined
the engine.

A maker of custom skis had a shop in the center of town. I wanted to have
some skis made to order, but when I found that the job would take several
weeks and I wanted to ski as soon as possible, I had to find another way to get
equipment. I frequently went to the Schiffmeister, the hotel on the north shore
of the Konigssee where soldiers could stay free of charge. The rooms, furnished
in 'resort rustic' with a down comforter on every bed, were very nice, and
I always managed to get a room with a view of the lake. The hotel ran a ski
hut, where American soldiers paid no rent for use of skis, poles -- whatever.
Thus I spent a lot of time on the slopes with good -- though not my own -- skis.
The only lift was a rope tow, but we thought it was great. A major from the
German ski troops gave me some pointers, as did Horst and Wolfgang. Both
boys were good skiers; very likely they started skiing as soon as they could
walk. My ski experience at Konigssee got me started on Alpine skiing. I caught
the 'bug' and would ski for most of the rest of my life.

I became more homesick as Christmas approached. I had friends, of course, but
no one with whom I could share my beliefs and holiday traditions. I had been
going to the Evangelische Kirche [Lutheran church[ regularly, so, of course,
I went there on Christmas Eve. Much to my surprise, a WAC choir in the
balcony sang several times during the service. I did not know about the choir.
The women had not let the word out -- nor had they made any effort to recruit
men. The service was beautiful. It snowed that night, and Berchtesgaden was
at its prettiest. The town looked like a travel brochure picture of Christmas in
Tyrol.  NB: 4 Thirty five years later, I took Ruth to that church. I described many details of the building
to her, and when we went in, I was pleased to find that my memory was accurate. The two of
us attended a service in the church in 1989; it was still unchanged.

The girls that ran the Red Cross club put on a New Year's Eve party in a hall
near the Schiffmeister Hotel. Besides the dance floor there was a second room
for serving refreshments. The girls put up decorations and managed to find
party foods such as beer and soft drinks for the occasion. There was a nominal
admission to cover the girls' out-of-pocket expenses. Strictly speaking, liquor
was not allowed, but many service people came with a bottle of booze anyway.
The party was fun until a fight broke out. I saw the whole thing but stayed out
of the way. A Navy yeoman with the Justice Jackson War Crimes Tribunal from
Nurnberg with too many drinks under his belt became belligerent. (Germany
was Army country, so many soldiers viewed Navy personnel with a jaundiced
eye anyway.) The yeoman pushed his luck when he began to insult the Army.
A big burly first sergeant asked (told) him to 'knock it off.' The sailor started
swinging with a broken beer mug. The sergeant took the mug away from the
sailor and hit him with it. The sailor got a nasty cut on the head. Several of us
took him to the hotel, but he was hard to keep down. A medic finally gave him
a shot of something and carried him off to the dispensary in town, where he got
stitched up. He appeared at dinner in the Schiffmeister on New Year's Day
with a bandaged head. The first sergeant was in the dining room, and
I expected more fireworks. Instead the sailor approached the sergeant's
table -- all smiles -- and asked if he could join the sergeant's party for dinner.
They acted like old friends, and I doubt anything more ever came of the
incident.

During the same New Year's Day dinner, we were treated to an impromptu ice
skating show. The windows of the hotel dining room looked out on the shore of
Konigssee. The lake was frozen, and someone had groomed the ice in front
of the hotel so it could be used for serious figure skating. We considered the
young lady performing for us to be very good. Whether she was or not makes
no difference. All of the diners thought she was great.

I settled into a routine after the holidays. I went to Salzburg every day to pick
up and deliver mail for my unit. I attended concerts in Salzburg whenever
I could, and I went to Konigssee to ski as often as possible. I, like everyone else,
was biding my time and awaiting the announcement that soldiers in the point
spread including my number would be the next to go back to the States.
My day came in February. I liked Bavaria, but it couldn't compare with the
little prairie town in Minnesota that was my home.

Chapter XVII: Home

The first step in my journey home took me to the collection depot in Rosenheim,
a town between Salzburg and Munich. There each of us was assigned to
a camp on the French coast. The coastal camps were named for cigarettes
brands -- Lucky Strike, Chesterfield, etc. I was sent to Camp Phillip Morris
near LeHavre, a depot for soldiers being sent to New York. Veterans bound for
Boston or various southern ports in the United States were taken to other
camps. The troops exuded a cheerful air of expectancy, although a few Gls
were not happy to be going home. Some were leaving girl friends or wives
behind. (The wives would be sent to the United States at some later date.)
Others were leaving lucrative black market businesses. Camp Phillip Morris
was dreary and its grounds muddy, but no one seemed to notice. Wooden
sidewalks connected all the important buildings, so we didn't have to slosh
around in the muck. I was assigned to a tent with some very nice fellows. We
hoped to be shipped out together, but we weren't.

On a gloomy day in February, I left Camp Philip Morris and went to LeHavre,
where, after the usual Army delay, I boarded the USS George Washington,
a converted luxury liner much like the Santa Rosa that took me overseas in the
first place. Prior to boarding ship, we had to exchange all of our foreign
currency for American money. We could convert funds only in an amount
equal to the sum of all our pay while in Europe plus ten percent. Some fellows
had much too much money from their black market dealings or large gambling
winnings. Several Gls approached me and asked if I would exchange some of
their money for them. I had enough of my own to use up all of my allowance,
but even if I had not, I would not have done as they asked. Not only was such
an exchange illegal: it was also asking for trouble with the military authorities.
I thought it strange that we were limited on money exchange but could take
home all the merchandise and souvenirs we wanted. I had a German pistol,
a camera, a Swiss watch, and a leather telephone case.
I acquired the German pistol in a trade, the camera from the camera shop in Bad
Reichenhall, the Swiss watch also in a trade, and the leather case from a
German Signal Corps Officer.  Had those items been
given their proper value and added to my exchange allowance, I would have
been way over my limit.  I gave the watch to my father and the pistol to my son Peter. I kept the camera for
myself, and my children used the leather case to contain a puzzle of the United States.

It takes a long time to load a troopship, so we could not leave immediately. My
quarters were crowded and modest, but I was so happy to be going home that
I did not mind at all. The GW was a bigger and nicer ship than the Santa Rosa,
and the food tasted good. Perhaps everything seemed better because I was
going west instead of east.

On the first day out of LeHavre our ship stopped unexpectedly. We were in the
middle of the English Channel in calm seas, so there seemed to be no reason to
delay our getting under way. After what seemed a long time just sitting
motionless, a harbor tender pulled alongside, and some very official-looking
Frenchmen came aboard. We had a stowaway on our ship. He was found and
taken aboard the tender, which headed back to shore. We passengers never
learned who the stowaway was. Was he a smuggler, a European trying to reach
America, an American without a passport? The possibilities were endless!

Shipboard activities became routine and boring. We were fed three meals
a day, each served in several shifts. Movies were shown in some of the larger
rooms, and there was a lot of reading and gambling. We had one lifeboat drill.
I witnessed one exciting incident. A crap game was being played on a blanket
in a secluded passageway. Some GI had organized the game, and because he
owned the blanket and the dice, he made the rules and ran the game. He called
himself the 'house.' The rules were the usual for craps -- with one exception.
Anytime craps ( 1, 2, or 12) was rolled, the house picked up the shooter's bet.
Those who had 'faded' the shooter would ordinarily have won that money, but
instead they got to take back only what they had bet -- the loser's money going
to the 'house.' Some gambler entered the game without knowing the rules. He
'faded' the shooter for some part of the shooter's bet, and when the shooter
rolled craps, he thought that he had won. The 'house' picked up the money the
newcomer thought was his. He was furious and had to be restrained. Even
after the rules were explained he continued to berate the 'house' and all of the
other players. He got his money back in a dark passageway that night.
The 'house' got roughed up a bit but chose not to resist. He learned never
again to run a game without everyone's knowing the house rules.

The voyage from New York to Marseilles took two weeks, but the return trip
required only one. The USS George Washington was considered a fast liner.
Viewing the Statue of Liberty was quite a thrill. It seemed like a long time since
I had seen her on the way out of New York Harbor. Upon landing we were
taken immediately to Camp Kilmer, New Jersey, where I boarded a troop train
going to Camp McCoy, near Sparta, Wisconsin.

The train arrived about 2:00 A.M. Incoming troops were delivered to barracks
and told to meet in the mess hall. There each of us was informed he could have
any meal he wanted -- or he could have something light and collect a special
meal the next day. The cooks had been instructed to prepare food for arriving
troops at any time of the day or night. Everyone elected to have something like
a coffee and doughnuts and go to bed. The next day at noon I had a steak
dinner with apple pie and ice cream for dessert.

The Army discharge procedure did not take very long. Most of the paperwork
had been done in advance. If a soldier wanted medical or dental care, he was
allowed to choose between getting it immediately at Camp McCoy or waiting
and having it done as a civilian. No one in my group stayed for any medical or
dental work. I needed some tooth repair but chose to have it done later.
I wanted to get home too much to wait around.

I called home as soon as I found a phone. I thought that my call would be a big
surprise to my parents, but they had known that I was in the United States from
the moment I landed. The Army sent a telegram to the next of kin of every
returning veteran. Mother and Dad even knew when to expect me to arrive in
Villard.

On the day that I was scheduled to leave, a major came into my barracks and
asked for me. I could not imagine what the trouble might be. I was anxious to
get going and worried that I might be detained. The major was pleasant and
invited me to go with him. We got into his staff car and were taken across the
post. There we went into a building where a captain was waiting for us.
The captain told me that I had not received my Purple Heart and Bronze Star
medals. The action at Gertwiller did not go unnoticed after am The
presentation was brief but impressive. The major then had his driver take us
back to my barracks, where I stuffed the medals into my duffel bag and hurried
back to the major's car. The major took me to the train just in time for
departure: I was headed for St. Paul only minutes after I arrived at the station!

There was a festive air aboard that train. About half of the passengers were
discharged servicemen. They were boisterous in celebrating their new civilian
status. A major addressed a GI as Sergeant and was quickly told that Mister was
the correct title. They put their arms around each other and shouted their
delight. Liquor was not in evidence, so the party remained only noisy, never
out-of-hand. Some of the veterans got off along the way, so the car grew
quieter as we approached St. Paul.

In St. Paul I had to wait until late afternoon for the 'Soo' line local to take
me to
Glenwood. I ate in the St. Paul depot, boarded my train, and settled back for
the three-hour trip. I leaned out the half-open door between cars as we
approached the station in Glenwood, and I remember catching my first glimpse
of my parents and my brother Paul. (Bob, my other brother, was in the Army,
stationed at Fort Belvoir, Virginia.) It was cold on the station platform, but the
four of us stood and talked anyway, our reunion happy and tearful at the same
time. The ten-mile ride to Villard was pleasant. When we got home my
mother set out all sorts of food. I really was not hungry, but I ate anyway.
Mother and Paul went to bed late that night, and my father and I stayed up to
talk of many things until early the next morning.

My return caused little excitement in Villard. Many veterans had already come
home, so one more vet was hardly newsworthy. The local weekly newspaper
carried a small notice but nothing more. I hardly expected a parade down
Main Street!

Many consumer goods were still hard to come by in early 1945. I could wear
some of my pre-War civilian clothes, but most of those things did not fit very
well. (I had lost nearly forty pounds!) I needed (or wanted) some new white
shirts, but I could not find any in Villard. I managed to replenish some items in
my wardrobe in nearby Alexandria and Glenwood. I bought my first post-War
suit, a brown pin-stripe model, in Minneapolis. One might think that after all
those years wearing khaki, I would hardly pick a brown suit. Indeed it was my
last choice, but it was the only one I could find. Months later I purchased
a second suit, a blue one.

The return to civilian life affected every veteran differently. Some ex-Gis had
a difficult time adjusting. Many were so nervous that any loud noise spooked
them: they would fall to the ground at the noise of an automobile's backfiring,
a sound not at all like the shot of a rifle or explosion of an artillery shell. Some
ex-servicemen wore clothes as far removed in color and style from service
uniforms as they could find. One fellow I knew bought several of the most
gaudy, hand-painted silk neckties one could imaginer I was less flamboyant,
and my adjustment was really very easy.

I wanted to go back to school as soon as possible. I went to Minneapolis to
check out the University of Minnesota class schedule for spring quarter. My GI
Bill of Rights entitlement took away much of the economic burden of my
returning to the classroom. It authorized me to attend the school of my choice
for as long as I was in service plus one year -- up to a maximum of four years.
I resolved to use as much of my educational privilege as possible.
(Footnote 2: The GI Bill of Rights is the popular name for the 1944 Servicemen's Readjustment Act, which
provided United States veterans of World War II with special assistance. The act supported
the economy against a postwar slump, raised the national educational level, and made
housing available. Sponsored by President Roosevelt and supported by veterans' groups, the
act had several major provisions:

1. A veteran was entitled to as much as four years of education and/or vocational training
with tuition up to $500.00 per year, charges for books and fees, and living allowances of
$50.00 per month for a single veteran and $75.00 for a man with dependents, all at
government expense.

2. A veteran was entitled to as many as fifty-two weeks of unemployment insurance at
$20.00 per week. Taking advantage of this stipulation was called Membership in the 52-20
Club.

3. A veteran was entitled to buy a home, farm, or business with a loan guaranteed by the
Veterans' Administration.
Amendments in 1945 raised tuition payments above $500.00, living allowances to $65.00 and
$90.00 for single and married men respectively, and home-loan guarantees from $2,000.00 to
$4,000.00.
Though the GI Bill contributed to the building boom in the suburbs after World War II, its
major impact was on education. Educators were unprepared for the flood tide of more than
2.5 million veterans who became students in 1946 and 194 7. Villages of prefabricated houses
and trailers became as common as dormitories on college campuses everywhere.
End Footnote)

I stayed with my Aunt Emma and Uncle Gust, my Minneapolis relatives, for
a few days while checking things out at the U of M. I found that the third
quarter was not a good time to get back into the academic scene because too
many courses were taught in sequence beginning with fall quarter. I chose to
start classes during the summer, at which time I would go through the red tape
necessary to get back into school and to begin receiving my veteran's benefits.
I also arranged for room and board in a fraternity house. After taking care of
those details, I went to St. Louis to visit relatives and friends.

Back in Villard, I found time heavy on my hands. I needed little time to
'unwind.' I wanted to get moving again. There were few jobs awaiting
returning veterans in a sm~ll town. Even if I could have found employment
nearby, I had no car for the commute.

My father let me use the family automobile for several all-day excursions. The
springtime weather was nice and the outings pleasant, but they did not use up
much time.

I occupied myself for awhile by doing some work on the church and the
parsonage. The parsonage was in need of paint, so I painted it. I also helped
the trustees with routine maintenance of the church. I worked for Art Fischer
occasionally on a day-to-day basis. I had worked for him before the War, so
I knew what he wanted. Art was in heavy construction and moving: he moved
such things as buildings, huge boilers, etc. I sometimes worked a shift at the
switchboard in the telephone office. The telephone company in Villard was
owned and operated by a man and his son and daughter-in-law. The
switchboard had to be tended twenty-four hours a day, so they appreciated
having someone who could take over occasionally. I learned a lot doing odd
jobs while waiting to go back to school.

In June it was time for me to go to Minneapolis for the University of Minnesota
summer session. Mother and Dad took me down to the city. I think they used
my move as an excuse to take a short trip. Travel during the War had been
restricted by gas rationing, so an outing was a special treat.
Now I was back in school. I went home on weekends, and I joined Villard's
baseball team. Rural leagues played their games on Sunday afternoons. I didn't
always have a way of getting back to Minneapolis after the games, so Dad
frequently took me to Sauk Center, where I caught a Greyhound bus.

One weekend my parents picked me up in Minneapolis so that I could go to
Judy Heyne's wedding with them. The Heynes lived in neighboring Detroit
Lakes when I was a kid, buf Pastor Heyne had since taken a call to Waconia.
The wedding was to be there. I recall that I found it strange that 'little' Judy
Heyne was getting married. Her older brother Bob, who was my age, and I had
been good friends all through grade school. I came to realize suddenly that life
went on while I was away and that the Judy Heynes of the world grew up
during that time and were now getting married.

Tom Olson was the only one of my old friends who returned to Minneapolis.
Tom's roommate, Merle Gorder, was a Navy fighter pilot with weekend reserve
duty. Battle Lake, his home town, was in central Minnesota, and he would
frequently fly over his parents' home while on 'weekend warrior' duty. I doubt
the Navy would have approved his flying upstate to 'buzz' his family and
friends!

That summer the congregation in Villard arranged a celebration honoring
Dad's twenty-fifth anniversary of ordination into the ministry. There was an
afternoon service in the church and afterwards other activities in the town hall.
Some of the Waconia and Minneapolis relatives came. The congregation's gift
to my father was a sum of money to be put towards a new car. The family
automobile made it through the War. It had to: no new cars were built during
those years. Dad ordered a new DeSoto, which was at that time, a Chrysler product.
The dealer placed the order and told
Dad the car might not be delivered fully equipped.  For example, some cars were delivered with wooden bumpers -- with a promise that the
regular metal bumpers would be installed by the dealer as soon as they were available.

When his first post-War DeSotos were delivered, the local dealer sold all of them
to customers willing to pay extra 'under the table' money. There was nothing that
Dad could do but take back his down payment and go to another dealer. He then
purchased
a nice new Chevrolet.

Several incidents during my adjustment to civilian life reminded me that there
had been a war. The civilian population on the home front was used to
restrictions -- and also certain abuses. There were many who cheated on the
system, and there had been a thriving black market in scarce commodities. As
a veteran, I was a 'babe in the woods' and did not always understand what was
going on. I should have known, I suppose, because I had seen it all in post-War
Europe. I just thought that sort of thing would not happen in the United States.
How naive!

While at the University of Minnesota I often hitchhiked to my destination. On
one occasion in the summer of 1946, I was picked up by a fellow who was very
talkative. He said that he got along just fine during the War. He had no
trouble getting tires and gasoline on the black market. He boasted of his ability
to get by when everyone el~e was having difficulty. Near the end of my ride
I casually remarked that I had served in the Armored Forces and on several
occasions we could have used some of his gasoline. He was very quiet after
that.

In September I moved out of the fraternity house into a rooming house near
campus. Phil Johnson, a good friend and high school classmate of my brother
Bob, was my roommate. Our room was typical of accommodations around any
urban campus, but its rent seemed high. During the War, the government had
imposed controls on rents in an effort to hold down inflation. The control was
still in effect in 1946, so it was easy for us to determine what our rent should
have been. Phil and I checked with the Office of Price Administration and
found that our landlord was, indeed, charging more than the ceiling. We
informed him, and he professed ignorance of the law. He said that he had just
purchased the house and that the previous owner had not informed him of the
rules. Legally we could have claimed treble damages, i.e. we could have asked
for three times the amount he overcharged. Instead we just asked that he
adjust our rent and apply the overpaid amounts to our next month's rent. He
agreed, of course, and we enjoyed the rest of our stay in his house.

Almost all of the people with whom I had contact during my first regular
quarter back on campus were very nice. Sometimes I wore a veteran's pin,
affectionately dubbed a Ruptured Duck, in my coat lapel, but I really didn't
need it. Somehow people could always spot a veteran, even without a label!

Baseball had always been my favorite sport. The I 946 World Series pitted the
Boston Red Sox against the St. Louis Cardinals. I was a Cards fan, and I listened
to as much of the Series as I could. I may even have cut a class or two to hear
the games. The Cards won the series with a dramatic and famous play. Enos
'Country' Slaughter scored from first on a long single. Johnny Pesky, the Sox
shortstop, was the relay man on the throw in from the outfield, and he paused
just long enough for Slaughter to score. I remember the drama Phil and
I sensed as we sat with our ears glued to my little radio.

Not all faculty members were prepared to teach the veteran student. My
German instructor was really a high school teacher who was hired by the
University during the faculty shortage, and she treated us as if we were high
school kids. Some of the veterans objected strenuously, and she soon changed
her methods.

I still did not know what field I wanted to enter. I considered architecture
because it combined the artistic with the mathematical. I felt one's major
should be job-oriented rather than purely academic, that medicine and
engineering were preferable to history, English, physics, or chemistry. I had to
learn that a student could major in any one of these subjects and still find
employment, that he did not have to be a minister, a lawyer, a dentist, or
a businessman to support himself. I stumbled around trying to find my calling
until a few years later, when at Oregon State, Professor James Brady and
Professor Richard Dempster inspired me to study physics and mathematics.

Late in my first quarter back on campus I met Ruth Pauline Volkert at a Gamma
Delta function; Gamma Delta was an organization for Lutheran students on campus. It was sponsored by
the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod.
There was little chemical reaction between us in our first
encounter, but during winter quarter I took her out for the first time -- and not
long after that we became engaged.
We were married on April 4, I 948.

Chapter XVIII: A Soldier's Return

Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God. (Psalm 147:7 KJV)

For many years I gave little thought to my Army career. Few people asked
about it, and I never spoke of it voluntarily. I directed my attention toward my_
family, my church, and my profession. In the back of my mind, however,
I nurtured the idea that one day I would return to Europe and visit some of the
places that were important in my service experience. Eventually, that dream
became a reality several times over.

I first returned to Europe at Christmastime, 1978, when Ruth and I went on
a Reformation tour. Many of the sites relating to Martin Luther are in East
Germany, which was Communist in 1978. We spent a day in Paris before
flying to West Berlin. The Paris that I remembered as a soldier in 1945 had
changed, but the familiar landmarks were the same. My earlier experience
must have made a great impression on me because so much of what I had seen
came back to me.

Nothing on the German part of the tour seemed familiar. I had never been in
any of the places we visited. Only the evidence of destruction and rebuilding
in West Berlin gave me a vague sense of having been there before. Communist
East Germany was not nearly so well restored, and much of the remaining
rubble was a grim reminder of my earlier trip to the continent.

I sensed the War again at the concentration camp at Buchenwald. I had not
actually been there, but I had taken my tank into several other prison camps.
The sign Arbeit macht frei [Work makes one free.] over the gate struck
a familiar chord, for that sign is over the gate of every German prison camp.
I remembered it well from Dachau. The thought did not make much sense to
me at the time -- nor did it seem any more reasonable to me in 1978.

Work
makes one free in a prison camp involves a contradiction of terms. Only after
reading more about the Holocaust did I come to understand the terrible irony of
the expression.

In 1980, Ruth and I went on a tour that included the Oberammergau Passion
Play. Other stops along the way included Traunstein, Berchtesgaden, Salzburg,
and Worms -- all places where I had fought as a soldier or had visited as part
of the Occupation Army. Berchtesgaden interested me the most because I lived
there for several months. While there Ruth and I left the organized tour for
a few hours and took off on our own. The first familiar place we came upon
was the Berchtesgadner Hof, the best hotel in town. We walked around in the
public rooms and the patio in the back of the hotel. Nothing had changed, and
the magnificent view of Mount Watzman remained as lovely as I remembered.
Because of our limited time, we had to hurry along: I wanted to visit the church
I used to attend. Before we went in I described the interior to Ruth. I even
remembered how the chancel had been decorated for the 1945 Christmas Eve
service.

We stayed overnight in Traunstein, where I once attended a United Service
Organization show in 1945. Nothing about the town was familiar to me on my
second visit. Ruth had had a shoulder operation before we left Seattle, and
because she had to do daily physical therapy, we were always up before the rest
of our fellow travelers. While she was doing her exercises, I took a walk in
a city park near our hotel. At that quiet early hour I was quite alone when
I came to the memorial to the townspeople who fought and died in two world
wars. I reflected on many things in the serene beauty of the park. The people
there grieved for their lost loved ones just as much as their counterparts in
America. I felt a flood of emotion as I left for breakfast, where inevitably we'd
hear the schedule of the day's activities.

In the cathedral in Salzburg we heard the beautiful strains of a Schubert mass
being performed for the Feast of Assumption. Most of the other places in
Salzburg the tour group visited seemed familiar, and I enjoyed seeing them
again. One spot I did not remember was the gazebo in which Lisle and Rolf
danced in The Sound of Music. It is not located by the main house -- as one
might expect -- but across the lake from it. From Salzburg we went to
Innsbruck, the landmarks of which I remembered well.

The Passion Play at Oberammergau, the purpose of the tour, overshadowed my
memories of War. It was a truly wonderful happening, both as a dramatic
presentation and as a religious experience.
We toured more of Bavaria after the play. We watched the Glockenspiel in the
Rathaus [city hall] tower in Munich. At eleven o'clock every morning, figures
in the chiming clock come to life as two tiers of dancing and jousting
mechanical figures perform their hourly match. I recognized the square that
I had ridden through in a tank, but the Glockenspiel was not in operation
then.
(Footnote 1: In 1945, a GI donated paint to have the figures refurbished. In return for his favor, he got
to ride one of the life-size wooden horses in the jousting tournament. Thus the GI became a
knight(!) for a day.
End Footnote)

Just a few kilometers northwest of Munich is Dachau, part our tour's itinerary.
I wondered how I would feel if I went there again, but I was determined not to
avoid the encounter and stayed with the group. Most of the camp had been
dismantled, so all that was seen on the near-empty grounds was a visitor center
with exhibits, and some interesting outdoor sculpture. The memorial is
a beautifully-executed work. It does not minimize the horror of the camp;
rather it presents the story in a tasteful and informative way.

In an effort to recall my exact feelings on that April day in 1945, I left Ruth to
be by myself for a time. My mind conjured up a jumble of images, none of
which was very coherent. I remembered a lot of shouting and crying and
screaming. There were gunshots as prisoners tried to kill their guards, and
Americans from the 45th Infantry Division had to maintain order under
extremely difficult conditions. One's first impulse under such horrible
circumstances is to help the victims, but there were too many of them to
administer aid one-on-one. The Medical Corps and the Military Police had
to be called upon to help. As soon as it was apparent that tank firepower
would not be needed, our unit was sent back to our battalion. There I learned
that some members of the battalion had been involved in the actual liberating
of the prisoners.

After a little time by myself, I rejoined Ruth in the main museum, where
enlarged photographs proved more electrifying than any mental images I may
have experienced while walking alone around the camp. (When Ruth and
I were in Israel with a group of students from the Lutheran Bible Institute of
Seattle in 1987, I was asked to speak a few words at one of the Holocaust
memorial sites. In my talk I said that we have been endowed with the great gift
of selective memory and that life would be intolerable were we unable to
forgive and put some things far back into the recesses of our memory banks.)

Worms, the next city on our itinerary, had special meaning for me, for I crossed
the Rhine in a tank there on Easter Sunday, April 1, 1945. After the War, the
town was completely restored, so in 1980, I got to see the Reformation sites that
I missed in 1945.

Many observations marked the anniversaries of the most important events of
World War II -- the bombing of Pearl Harbor, D-Day, VE-Day, and VJ-Day
among them. Two such commemorations that concerned me were the fortieth
and fiftieth anniversary observances of the Battle of Hatten-Rittershoffen. Ruth
and I attended both.

The Liberator, the 14th Armored Division Association's periodical, ran
announcements of many such occasions months in advance, and a division
veteran, who owned a travel agency, arranged special tours. Ruth and
I decided to go to the fortieth anniversary in 1985, but we wanted to travel
independently in order to see more of Europe than just a little corner of Alsace.

We flew from Seattle to Copenhagen and then on to Dusseldorf, Germany,
where we rented an Opel. We drove first to Cologne to visit its famous
cathedral and then went on to Bonn, the capitol of the West German Republic
at the time. Ruth recognized the city as the place of Beethoven's birth, and
I indulged her with a visit to that landmark of culture. From Bonn to Stolberg,
where we stayed at the charming and comfortable Altes Brauhaus Burgkeller,
a sixteenth century brewery converted into an inn. The meals there were
excellent. Ruth ordered steak tartar, raw ground beef with raw egg and capers.
I had something less exotic.

The next day we toured Aachen, ancient seat of the Holy Roman Empire. We
went to mass in Charlemagne's chapel, around which the Aachen cathedral was
built. Charlemagne was crowned the first Holy Roman emperor on Christmas
Day in 800, so the chapel may be the oldest building in which we have ever set
foot. The Allies captured Aachen, the first German city to be taken, in October,
1944.

Because 1985 marked the (ortieth anniversary of several important battles, we
met many other American veterans and their parties, especially near the
German-Belgian border. The Battle of the Bulge ended in late 1944, but its
fortieth anniversary observations were delayed until spring of 1985 to avoid
the bad weather of winter.2 The battle at Hatten-Rittershoffen, part of the
succeeding Operation Nordwind:4 was fought in January, 1945. Its fortieth
anniversary observation was deferred until May of 1985.
(Footnote 2: Winter in the Ardennes was terrible in 1944 and no better in 1984.
End Footnote)

Ruth and I both read A Time for Trumpets, a book about the Battle of the Bulge
by Charles MacDonald. MacDonald was not only a good historian: he had
actually taken part in the battle. Places we visited mentioned in his book
include Bastogne, Malmedy, Wiltz, Clervaux, and Ettlebruck. Our innkeeper in
Wiltz was a World War II history buff. He was a just a boy in 1944, but he
recalled a meeting of Generals Eisenhower, Bradley, and Patton in the building
next to the inn. He lent us a German 'coffee-table' book about the Ardennes
Offensive (the German name for the Battle of the Bulge)
written from the German point of view.

In Clervaux we met a veterans' tour led by MacDonald himself. We spoke to
him and later joined his group for lunch. Ruth flattered MacDonald by telling
him that Fred Friedel, her military history teacher at Bellevue Community
College, admired his work and that his book Company Commander had been
required reading for the course. MacDonald acknowledged that Ruth had
a good teacher who knew whereof he spoke. He then wrote a short note to
Friedel, which Ruth hand delivered. Later in that eventful day Ruth rode down
the hill between the War museum and the restaurant in a Jeep driven by some
ex-Gls in MacDonald's group. We were never told where they found the Jeep.
We visited the American Army cemetery just outside the city of Luxembourg,
where Gen. Patton is buried. The staff there was most courteous and helpful.

We also stopped at a less well-known German cemetery nearby. The crosses
marking the graves of the German soldiers are gray and coarsely hewn -- in
sharp contrast to the graceful white crosses in the American cemetery.
I wondered what the contrast meant in regard to the two cultures.

We spent the night, our last in Luxembourg, at the Bamberg, an old inn on the
Moselle River.

The next day we went to the German military cemetery at Bitburg. We had
trouble finding it because none of the town's citizenry would admit to knowing
where it was. When President Ronald Reagan visited there in 1984, he roused
cries of protest from his critics because along side the graves of regular German
soldiers were the graves of the hated German Stormtroopers, the dreaded SS.
Even in 1984, it seemed strange for an American president to show them
honor.

From Bitburg we drove to Cochem on the Moselle River. We stopped at Burg
Eltz, an ancient castle that looks as if it could have been the setting for the story
of Rapunzel. It even had a high bay window from which she could have let
down her hair.

We stayed along the Rhine that night and arrived at the German-French border
late the next morning. Gasoline was cheaper in Germany than in France, so we
stopped to fill the tank. A vender was selling fruit at the station, and
we bought some to eat in the car. How strange it all seemedI The last time
I crossed the frontier at that place I was engaged in fierce fighting. Now I was
munching on an apple and some grapes while going through a routine check at
a customs gate.

Kapsweyer and Steinfeld, towns important in my division's assault on the
German Siegfried Line, are near the border. Very little seemed familiar to me
as we drove through them. Our tank crew slept in the last house in town in
1944, but I could not find it. We asked a local woman some questions, but she
acted as if she were unaware of her village's significance in the War -- or
she just chose not to remember and thus not have to communicate with us.
We had lunch in a beautiful restaurant in Wissembourg, the courtyard of
which I recognized from 1944. Next we visited the Maginot Line. When I was
there in 1944, I was naively unaware of being right in the middle of the
famous French fortifications.

After a brief stop at a town that I remembered for its having electricity, we
arrived at Niederbronn and checked into the Grand Hotel, a luxury hostelry
and casino. The hotel served as headquarters for the tour group. Ted Perkins,
the group's leader, was most congenial and allowed us to join in all the planned
activities. The town mayor held a reception for us that evening. I was the only
member from the 25th Tank Battalion so was given a little extra applause.
The next day Ted invited us to join the group for a tour of Verdun, the scene of
many German-French conflicts through the centuries and famous as the site
of a great battle during World War I. Verdun turned out to be one of the most
sobering and chilling places we have visited.

Sunday, June 16, we arose early because it was Fathers' Day, and I had several
cards to open. After breakfast in our room we went to mass at the church
across the street from the hotel. During the service I heard our bus engine
warming up, so we left immediately to get aboard. My first impressions of
Hatten and Rittershoffen were much the same as those of Kapsweyer and
Steinfeld. Most of the War-torn towns in Europe have been rebuilt, so there is
little to remind the returning soldier of the havoc and destruction he
remembers.

The bus driver dropped us off near the monument between Hatten and
Rittershoffen. There the American veterans from the American 42nd and 79th
Infantry Divisions assembled with the German 21st Panzer, 25th Panzer
Grenadier, and 7th Parachute Divisions. The United States Army European
Honor Guard added a marshal air; it had participated in all high-level
functions observed by the Army in Europe, the Normandy ceremony attended
by President Reagan among them. The French provided a color guard and
band, and French dignitaries, including a representative of the French Ministry
of Defense, were very much in evidence. A representative from every American
division placed a wreath at the monument. The Germans and French also
placed wreaths. Following the unveiling of the monument, the veterans and
their wives marched into Hatten, where more ceremonies followed. Local
dignitaries spoke, and Americans responded. I was one of the American
veterans given a moment at the podium. General Arnold Burmeister, German
commander at the battle, was the featured speaker of the day. He was eloquent.

The proceedings became more informal after that. The assembly broke into
little groups, and soldiers and civilians from both sides exchanged stories. At
noon the host towns provided Kugelhopf, an Alsatian specialty, and wine
at a lawn party. We were served by pretty girls in native dress. A sumptuous
banquet followed the lawn party, and after the meal the townsfolk presented
memorial gifts to all the American veterans. The people waved and threw
kisses as our bus slowly and carefully made its way through the crowd.

The next day we followed Ted Perkins and his tour group into Rittershoffen.
We left them about mid-morning to try and find the family with whom I spent
Christmas Eve, 1944. With a bit of sleuthing, we did indeed locate them.
Their name is Holzmann. The story of my reunion with the Holtzmanns was
printed in the Liberator. (See Appendix E for the complete text.)

We bade farewell to the Holtzmanns in late morning and had lunch in
Betschdorf. The restaurant was small, so we were able to engage a couple at
the next table in conversation. We asked them if they had attended the
ceremonies in Hatten and Rittershoffen over the weekend. They allowed that
they were from Germany and were not interested in any such observation. We
quickly changed the subject! We asked about the local pottery, for we had seen
several advertisement for Poteries and wanted to buy some of their wares. Our
neighboring diners told us that the really good Alsatian pottery was available in
Soufflenheim and took us there to shop. We found the Soufflenheim pottery
more refined and more artistically decorated than that of Betschdorf. We
bought Kugelhopf forms in three sizes.

Our first stop in France was Rheims, site of Gen. Eisenhower's headquarters.
I was interested in the city for military reasons; yet we made no effort to find
any of the places associated with the War. Instead we visited the famous
Rheims cathedral. The damages it suffered during the War had been repaired.
In fact, it was so fully restored that it is again numbered among the great
cathedrals of France.

The next day, our morning patisserie stop, a ritual, was in Beauvais. When the
French Gothic cathedrals were being built, neighboring sees or bishoprics
competed with one another to claim all manner of superlatives. The bishop of
Beauvais wanted to have the highest choir ceiling of any cathedral in the
world. He and his flock had it for a short time, but it collapsed. So much for
mortal arrogance and prideI The rebuilt church is outstanding nonethelessI

Later in the day we went to Rouen, where Jeanne d'Arc was burned at the stake.
Rouen was another city with a great cathedral.
Claude Monet used the Rouen cathedral as the subject in a series of paintings
portraying the front of the church at different times of the day. We bought
a poster (not a print) of Monet's Kouen Cathedral at Dawn and eventually sent
it to our six-year-old grandson Thal because he read a book about Monet.

We used Bayeux as our headquarters while we were in Normandy. We stayed
in a small downtown pension the first night and a modern hotel the second.
The Bayeux cathedral museum houses the famous Bayeux tapestry, an
embroidered panel depicting the Battle of Hastings in 1066. When American
troops arrived in Bayeux, they found the tapestry displayed around the nave of
the church. It has since been hermetically sealed and placed in the museum.

The D-Day museum in Bayeux has the usual collection of soldiers' gear,
battlefield relics, etc. A small book, Das Evangelium nach Mark [The Gospel
According to St. Mark] was among the personal effects of a fallen German
soldier. My service devotional books had been a prayer book and New
Testament. How ironic that we should have to fight one another!

We saw the German bunkers and gun emplacements on the heights above the
Normandy beaches. Tom and Jan Dalby told of a strange experience they had while visiting the heights above the
beaches. They were in one of the German bunkers overlooking the English Channel when they
heard voices coming from below -- talking German. The people speaking German were
tourists, but Tom said he and Jan had an eerie feeling.

We walked around in shell craters left by the pre-landing
naval bombardment and saw the barbed wire at Point du Hoc. To take the
ground above Omaha Beach, the US Rangers had to scale the cliffs at the Point
and breach the wire. 6 Appropriate to the rules and results of war, there is an
American veterans' cemetery at Normandy.
(Footnote 6: June Johnson grew up on the Isle of Wight, which is located off the south coast of England.
During the War, townspeople were required to house government officials stationed on the
island. Rangers were trained on the cliffs on the south side of the island. When the invasion
began, the person assigned to June's parents' home came home early and appeared very pale.
Very simply he said It has begun! -- meaning, of course, the invasion of the continent.
End Footnote)

We toured Mont St. Michel off the Brittany coast and returned to Bayeux for
the night. The next day we drove back to Obernai in Alsace and checked in at
the Gouverneur Hotel. It had a cobblestone courtyard, and the second-floor
rooms opened onto a balcony that went around the entire courtyard. I met
a veteran of the Battle of the Bulge who had fought on the German side. He
was a Pole and had been a forced conscript. He seemed to think that the failure
of the Germans was due entirely to a shortage of gasoline for their armored
vehicles. It makes no difference now, and I told him so. He agreed, and we had
a nice talk.

Obernai is a beautiful city. The Allies destroyed the church steeple and the city
hall clock tower in 1944. Bo_th have been rebuilt to restore the city's old world
charm and feel.

We retraced the path my platoon followed forty years before. I found all of the
important places in Gertwiller immediately, for little had changed. The tavern
in which I sought refuge was closed, but the building was still there. The
garden wall that I vaulted to get away from the hail of bullets in the street still
defined a local burgher's courtyard. The only way to gain access to the
courtyard, then or now, is through the owner's house or over the wall. I used
the latter in 1944, but in 1985 I chose to skip the whole thing. The scene of
the attack on the tanks in Lieut. Tomey's platoon has become a peaceful stretch
of road, and the forest in which the German 88 was hidden is gone.

I took a few pictures, and we headed back to our hotel in Obernai. Spargel, or
white asparagus, was in season in the Rhine._ country when we were there. The
German and Alsatian people consider it a delicacy, and we enjoyed it on several
occasions, one of them being the dinner at in inn in Obernai. The next day,
after a tour of Strasbourg, we moved on into Germany.

I wanted to visit the places where I had been stationed as part of the Army of
Occupation after the War. Toging, first on my list, is east of Munich, so we
spent our first night in Germany in a little inn in Ascheim, a Munich suburb.

Each room was named for a city; ours happened to be the 'Paris' room. Toging
had changed but not a lot. The building I lived in was converted from a school
to a hospital. The large athletic field behind the school was gone, and
a developer had built some houses in its place. The village that we called
Hitler's Baby Farm became a tidy suburb of well-kept houses and gardens. The
Catholic church was new. I did not remember that the old church had been
damaged.

From Toging we drove the few kilometers to Burghausen, the town where
Harvey was assigned for occupation duty. When Harvey lived there, he and
I could go into only part of the ancient fortress, but Ruth and I were able to
tour the entire castle and gro11nds.

We drove on to Erlangen, where we stayed the night. The next day we were in
Bamberg, where our battalion fought, but nothing there looked familiar. We
drove on to Coburg, then to Bayreuth, and finally to Aschaffenburg.

The trip made lasting impressions on both Ruth and me, but we were ready and
relieved to be going home. Ruth felt she knew me better for having seen the
backdrop to a very important part of my life. Perhaps we even gained better
understanding of each other.

In 1989, Tom and Jan Dalby and Ruth and I visited parts of Germany, Austria,
Hungary, and Holland together. Some of the places in Austria and Germany
were a 'return' for me, for I had lived in them after the War.

We flew to Amsterdam and then to Vienna, where we did all the usual tourist
things associated with the city. Sunday morning we attended mass in the
Hofburg Chapel where the Vienna Choir Boys sing every Sunday. Near the end
of the mass we left and hurried to the Spanish Riding School for a performance
of the Lippizaner horses. After touring Eastern Austria and Hungary, we
circled back to Salzburg and that part of the Tyrol in which I spent what
I called my 'salad days' in the Occupation Army. Our hotel was in Anif, where
the opening scene of The Sound of Music was photographed. The Mirabel
Gardens in Salzburg impressed me favorably in 1945, and I have watched the
movie Hopscotch, starring Walter Matthau and Glenda Jackson, several times because the story is set there. The gardens
were as lovely as I remembered them. I looked for the restaurant that had been
a Red Cross Club, where I always stopped for coffee and doughnuts. I could not
find it.

The electric boats that took us out to St. Bartholoma on the Konigsee are the
same ones I rode in 1945, and the boatman gave the same echo demonstration
as he gave then. The lake's environs. however, were much changed. In 1989,
there were many home developments and concessions, and the north shore of
Konigsee had been made into a national park.

On Sunday, Ruth and I drove to Berchtesgaden to worship in the church
I attended as a serviceman. We became involved in a traffic jam, so we parked
the car to see what was happening. A Roman Catholic 'first communion'
celebration was about to begin, and the procession into the Stiftkirche took the
form of a parade. The presentation was impressive and cheerful, but we had to
leave in order to get to the Lutheran church on time for service. The Lutheran
order was formal, stiff, and sober by comparison, and the pastor was the only
person to speak to us afterwards. Perhaps the Protestants felt uneasy about
being a minority in a predominantly Catholic country. Whatever the reason,
the Lutherans seemed to live up to their 'frozen chosen' sobriquet. We
returned to the Catholic church and stayed long enough to witness the priest's
blessing on several of his little lambs.

Following the two church services, Ruth and I went to a downtown restaurant,
where our waitress informed us that the elevator to the Eagle's Nest, Hitler's tea
house atop Mount Kehlstein, was already in operation -- much earlier than
scheduled in the guide books. We hurried back to Anif to pick up the Dalbys,
so they could share in this wonderful bonus experience.
We returned to the United States by way of Amsterdam, where we spent a few
days unrelated to my War experience.

Ruth and I made yet one more nostalgia trip in 1995, the year that marked
the fiftieth anniversary of the Battle of Hatten-Rittershoffen. We thought the
observation might be anti-climactic after the fine fortieth anniversary
observance in 1985, but we chose to go anyway.

We spent some time in Spain, then flew from Madrid to Paris, where we rented
a car and drove to Hagenau in Alsace. Our motel sponsored several 14th
Armored Division parties. Mme. Lisa Pommois, the woman to be credited with
much of the success of the 1985 event, stopped by and joined us for dinner.

The ceremonies in 1995 were similar to those of 1985, but they lasted longer
and involved more people. A Roman Catholic service was held in Hatten,
a Lutheran service in Rittershoffen. The latter, which we attended, was
conducted in French, German, and English. The organist and choir director
was Berthe Holtzmann's daughter-in-law. Several of the Holtzmann clan
looked for us, but they did not find us because we wore no identifying
nametags. Later, when we stopped at the Holtzmann house, we found the
entire clan ready and waiting for our arrival!

The dinner reflected the best of
French cuisine. The Holtzmanns invited us to return the next day.
The observation included a very moving dedication of a memorial to the eighty
civilians from Hatten and Rittershoffen who were killed in the battle. The
towns are small, so every victim was surely known by everyone who survived.

Most of the Holtzmann family attended the noontime dinner at Berthe's house
the next day. The meal was wonderful again, and everyone was animated. We
communicated in German, English, and sign language. Otto's wife took us on
a town tour in the afternoon. Many displays in the museum had to do with the
War. The children in the public school made a series of murals depicting
Rittershoffen's history; several of the scenes emphasized the battle.

Late in the afternoon, Ruth and I went west into the area in which I fought in
the Battle of the Lower Vosges. The country is mountainous and covered by
dense forests. I gained new understanding of just how difficult the work of
Task Force Hudelson must have beenI

We wanted to visit the railroad car in which the 1917 Armistice was signed,
but the car, also the site of Hitler's gloating acceptance of France's surrender in
1940, was moved to Compiegne and later blown up when Hitler thought it
might be used for Germany's surrender after World War II. The building on
the site of the 1917 Armistice signing now contains a replica of the original
car.

We returned to Madrid, where we saw Picasso's Guernica in the Queen Sofia
Arts Center. The painting is Picasso's reaction to the bombing of Guernica,
which Generalissimo Francisco Franco allowed as target practice for the
German Luftwaffe during the Spanish Civil War. The painting, one of Picasso's
best-known works, depicts grotesque figures in the throes of agony.

Our last War-related stop was near the El Escorial, the royal pantheon
containing the tombs of Spanish monarchs. Only a few kilometers away,
marked by a huge cross on a mountain, is The Valley of the Fallen, burial place
for 43,000 soldiers from both sides in the Spanish Civil War, with its basilica
hewn into a mountain of granite.

In the years between 1977 and 1996, I made five trips to Europe that would
qualify as a soldier's return. Ruth accompanied me on all of them. I sincerely
believe that reliving some of my wartime experience and occupation duty gave
me a better comprehension and a deeper appreciation of the magnitude of
World War II and the sacrifices made by so many people, both military and
civilian. Ruth and I surely came to a new level of wonder at the price paid for
the liberty we so often take for granted.

Dr. Malcolm Muir closed his last lecture at the Elderhostel in Tennessee by
acknowledging the veterans of World War II for their contribution towards
that liberty, for, as he said, "Two of the most evil powers history has ever
known were Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan. Had they been successful in
their war effort, the world would have been plunged into darkness for two
hundred years." My feelings after resurrecting my experience as a solider,
a bearer of arms for the cause of my country in World War II, are best
expressed in three words I saw scrawled in chalk on a wall in the midst of
a pile of rubble in Augsburg. Not too surprisingly, they are the same words
spoken to me by a German Panzer officer as he and I shook hands at the
Rittershoffen monument in 1985. May they remain the hope of every new
generation!

Kein Krieg Wehr

No More War

Appendices:

Amen and Amen (Psalm 89:52, KJV)

Appendix B: 14th Armored Division, the Liberator Division

The 14th Armored Division was activated on November 15, 1942, with
Headquarters at Camp Chaffee, Arkansas. Elements of the division were called
upon to save lives and property in May of 1943 during a terrible flood along
the Arkansas River.

After participating in the 1943-1944 Tennessee maneuvers, the division had
one change of station -- to Camp Campbell, Kentucky -- before embarking for
the European Theater in October of 1944.

On October 29, 1944, the 14th became the first division to disembark at the
Port of Marseilles, and two weeks later elements of the division were
maintaining defensive positions along the French-Italian frontier. After
assembling in the vicinity of Rambervillers, on November 21, the division
launched an attack through the Vosges Mountains to eliminate and trap
German forces in this region. By December 4, the 14th had fought its way to
the Alsatian Plain and had captured Gertwiller, Benfield, and Barr, breaking the
backbone of the German defenses. After four days of hard fighting, the men
of the division crossed the Lauter River, entered Germany on December 16, and
battered their way into the outer defenses of the Siegfried Line.

The 14th was given a brief rest but on Christmas Day was sent to defend a long
sector of the front running south from Bitche to Neunhofen, as elements from
the Seventh Army were sent north to help meet the German counterattack in
the Bulge. On New Year's Day, 1945, the Germans launched an attack down
the Saar Valley through Bitche, and the 14th Division lines were badly bent by
the force of the enemy attack but held to stop the enemy drive.

After the failure of the Bitche attack, the Germans attempted to break through
to Strasbourg at Hatten and Rittershoffen, and the 14th was once again called
upon to halt the enemy in a series of bitter actions which took place starting
January 12. Fighting against positions in the old Maginot Line, across icy
plains, and through the rubble of destroyed cities, the 14th slugged it out with
three German divisions for ten days in what became known as one of the
greatest defensive battles of World War IL

On January 20, the enemy forces began withdrawing, and the division was
given a rest and assigned to defensive positions during February and early
March. On March 15, the division was back on the attack and drove across the
Moder River, cracked the Siegfried Line, and captured Germersheim on the
Rhine River. The Rhine was crossed at Worms on Easter Sunday, April 1. At
Hammerburg, the division freed four thousand Allied Prisoners Of War before
turning southeast to cross the Main River at Lichtenfels in order to cut the
Niirnberg-Bayreuth Autobahn.

The 14th continued to drive into southern Germany, crossed the Danube at
Ingolstadt, liberated the Moosburg Prison Camp where 110,000 Allied
prisoners from all nations were interned, and crossed the Isar River.

A concentration camp and three slave labor camps were overrun at Ampfing,
and elements of the division accepted surrender of the enemy air wing
controlling jet aircraft operations in Germany. The 14th established
bridgeheads across the Inn River at Jettenbach and Muhldorf before being
relieved on May 3 for occupation duties, which continued until the division
returned home for inactivation in September of 1945.

During two campaigns and 167 days of combat, the men of the Liberator
Division had freed an esti:inated 200,000 Allied Prisoners Of War and an
additional 250,000 slave laborers and displaced persons with a loss of 2,690
killed and wounded.

The 14th Armored Division's nickname as the Liberator Division was wellearned
and appropriate.

Appendix E: Christmas Eve, 1944, by Albert William Kratzke
as printed in the Liberator, Volume 23, No. 1, spring, 1988, beginning on page 6

I should like to share with our readers an interesting and poignant story. It
begins on Christmas Eve, 1944, and continues to the present. In fact, it is still
unfolding.

Those of you who have a copy of the memorial book that Mme. Lisa Pommois
prepared for the fortieth anniversary of the Hatten-Rittershoffen battle may
recall that in one of the articles Berthe Holtzmann recounts that 14th Armored
Division soldiers billeted in her home shared Christmas Eve, 1944, with her
and her three children. She says that some of the men even sang German
carols. I was the one of the five in our tank crew who knew the German songs.
Our story, Berthe's and mine, of what happened after Christmas Eve is recorded
below.

We did indeed sing carols -- Stille Nacht, O Tannenbaum, etc. We also shared
our Christmas treats. Berthe had some German cookies, which she brought out
and served. The Christmas tree was sparsely decorated, but unlike many other
households in the town, her family had one. It was lighted with real candles,
probably a terrible fire hazard, and I remember that the children, two boys and
a girl, wondered at the sight. We were comfortably quartered that night.

As we went about our mission, which included a return to Rittershoffen several
weeks after Christmas, I often wondered what happened to the family. I only
learned of their fate forty years later.

In June of 1985, my wife Ruth and I went to the Hatten-Rittershoffen fortieth
anniversary observation. Ted Perkins graciously allowed us to join his tour
group as 'tagalongs,' and on the Monday following the official ceremonies his
group went to Rittershoffen. We followed in our rented car and visited sites
with members of the group. When they left in mid-morning, Ruth and
I remained in Rittershoffen to seek out the family with whom I spent Christmas
Eve, 1944.

The only identification I could recall was the little girl's name: her mother and
brothers called her Annelies. I asked an older man on the street if he knew
anyone named Annelies who would be about forty-five years old. He and a lady
who came onto the scene responded immediately that it had to be Annelies
Holtzmann, sister of Otto and Alfred. They said she had married and now lived
in another town.

News travels fast, and it did not take long for the mayor's secretary, who
happened to be Otto's wife, to get onto the phone to let everyone know we were
in town. Soon Berthe and Madeleine, Berthe's second daughter born after the
War, appeared in the town hall square.

A happy reunion! Berthe remembered me for my blonde hair. (I am blonde
still, even in my sixties, though I have less hair than I had the first time Berthe
and I metI) Berthe said I hung a Christmas card onto her tree.

It was one happy extended family! who gathered around the Holtzmann
kitchen table for a glass of Schnapps that day we came together. They offered
us the rest of the bottle, and had we still been part of a group we may have
accepted it. However, I had memories of home-made 'white lightning' and
thought it best to decline.

We sang Die Lorelei and some other German songs. Before we left, Otto,
a wood carver, insisted on giving us a miniature harvest fork and flail as
present. Later that day we purchased an Alsatian doll, which we named -What
else? -- Annelies. When we returned to Seattle, we sent Berthe's
granddaughter Patty a Seattle T-shirt and the family some of my color
photographs of Northwest mountains and seashores. Patty wrote a note that
began with a French Merci ... while her grandmother's acknowledgment started
with a German Danke schon.

We still correspond. In one of my letters I asked Berthe what happened to her
and her family during those bitter days of January, 1945, and from then until
the end of the War. She responded with a letter that must have been difficult
for her to write. I asked her if she would mind if I shared her letter with the
readers of the Liberator. She agreed to have it printed, and my translation of
her letter follows. In order to preserve the feelings expressed in Berthe's
writing, I have made only a simple translation with no attempt to put her
writing into colloquial English.

Dear Kratzke Famil!f,
I received 11our kind letter with the good wishes. I am
pleased that you have thought of me again. I wish you
and yours the best in the New Year - happiness, health,
and God's blessings. Many thanks for the pictures of your
lovely grandchildren. In the summer we shalt take
pictures of us, too, so that you might learn to know our
whole family.

You have already met our Patricia Emm11
Holtzmann. Otto's children are Freddy Otto, Cathy
Caroline, and Christine Michele Holtzmann. Annelies'
children are Remy Albert and Jackie Robert Stumpf. The
famity tives in Roppenheim, a vittage on the Rhine.
Madeleine's children are Erick Robert, ChristopherChartes,
and Sytvia Corine Graff.

I shall never farget Christmas of 1944. I did not
know where my husband was. It was a sad time. We had
no lights, and there were soldiers everywhere. I wanted to
make things pleasant for the children, but unfortunatety
there were no gifts.

The night before the hotiday I sat down at my
sewing machine and sewed them some things. I set up a
small carbide lamp and brought the machine up close.

We surety did not know what lay before us. Constantly
I thank God that we survived.
What I have written in the Memorial Book is not
nearly all that we experienced. With haif frozen feet we
wandered here and there and never knew where we were.
We were often near death, even though we were away from
the batttle.

Once we were atmost smothered when a truck with
a trailer took us to Germany. Once we sat in an inn, where
someone gave us something to eat. When the town was
bombed, we were scarcely out on the street when the entire
building fell in and the innkeeper lay dead under the
ruins. At a collection point we were able to wash out our
eyes, but we had very little water and onty one pocket
handkerchief ar six peopte.

Then we were transported by railroad. The snow was
fifty centimeters deep, and the train was full of snow and
ice. The toilets werefrozen. It was dreadful. We had to
climb over a bank in order to find a clean ptace. Often the
train stood still far a long time because the depots were
being bombed. We didn't know where we were being
taken. The train atways moved in pitch-black night.

Finally, we arrived in Ulm. From there we went on to
an encampment where there was a long hall which was
nice and warm. But it was so_futt thatmostefthe peopte
had to sit on the floor. Until then we had not wept - not
even the children during the battles - because we were so
numbed by fear, anxiety, and cold. Then the tears began
to flow as a refined lady sang a German song to her
daughter. It was as if we were back in my homeland, that
dear country. All the people in the hall cried and cried.

Then in a horse-drawn sled we came to a small
farming town. Someone gave us a large room with two
beds, and we could finally get clean again. It was the best
time in our travels.  The skin over our whole bodies was
completely broken out from the dirt and cold. We did not
know our own faces, and our hair was full of soot and dirt.
The people brought us potatoes and apples and also warm
clothes, which I then made over far us.

We helped the people by working and thus earned
our bread. Alfred had to deliver milk from an old lady to
the dairy, and thereby we received our milk for nothing.
My mother knitted stockings from old wool remnants that
were in tatters. Alfred went to school, and Otto went to
kindergarten. 'Annefisfe,' as the people caffed her, simply
would not go with the strange children. She understood
but would not speak. Instead, she went to an old lady,
who would give her bread and butter and sometimes
something sweet.

We were able to recover a little, but then the War
came there. We had air raid alarms two or three times
a day and also in the night. Again we sat in cellars and
foxholes. We asked ourselves, "Must we experience yet
another battle?" There were no more big battles, but we
were still being fired upon. The town was occupied. It was
plundered and the women violated. At that time the
soldiers were not so decent to us as you were.

Once more we came away with our fives. Our
guardian angel had not forsaken us. But then I became
very ill with a gaff bladder infection. The doctor could not
help me because there was no medicine in the pharmacy.
At that time the military situation was at a standstill,
and we could not return home. I fay in bed and
deteriorated.

We could first return home in early June. The trip
was very difficult and full of obstacles. In Strasbourg we
learned that my husband was already released from
captivity, and that was a joy. Then we lived in wooden
barracks in Rittershqffen. There our Madeleine entered the
wodd in 1947. We lived very frugally.

We had to start all over again. We had to buy a cow
and beds and furniture. Neverthetess, we were lucky
because we were all together. In 1951, we were able to move
into our new house.  Finally, we could live normal lives
again. Thank God far that!

In the summer we took a beautiful trip atong the
Rhine, and when we passed the Loretei Rock the music
played "Ich weiss nicht was soll es bedeuten."
Frau Ruth sang that song so beautifully in our kitchen.

Now I shall close. Frau Ruth will need a great deal
of patience to transtate this long letter.

With hearifett greetings to your whole family,
Berthe Hottzmann

While on occupation duty in Toging, Bavaria, we witnessed the plight of the
Displaced Persons at a DP camp at the edge of town, but I never knew a DP
personally.

If any other member of that Christmas Eve group happens to read this article, I
should like to hear from him. Eddie Berg died of wounds sustained in April,
1945. The others in the crew were John Donges, Carl Phillips, and George
Johnson.

For that matter, if anyone else from the 25th Tank Battalion is interested in
these events, I hope he will contact me as well.


Appendix L: Address of Brigadier General John K. Rice

Resume of final address as delivered in the name of Brigadier General John K. Rice,
Commanding General of Camp McCoy, to each group of soldiers as they were
separated from the military service:

On this occasion, your last formation as members of the Armed Forces, it is
fitting that you should receive the following message from the commanding
general of this separation center.

You are being discharged from the Army today -- from your Army. It is
your Army because your skill and your patriotism, your labor and courage and
devotion have been some of the· factors which make it great. You have been a
member of the finest military team in history. You have accomplished miracles in
battle and supply. Your country is proud of you, and you have every right to be
proud of yourselves.

You have seen, in the lands where you worked and fought and where many
of your comrades died, what happens when the people of a nation lose interest in
their government. You have seen what happens when they follow false leaders.
You have seen what happens when a nation accepts hate and intolerance.
We all are determined that what happened in Europe and in Asia must not
happen to our country.

Back in civilian life you will find that your generation will
be called upon to guide our country's destiny. Opportunity for leadership is yours.
The responsibility is yours. The nation which depended on your courage and
stamina to protect it from its enemies now expects you as individuals
to claim your
right of leadership, a right which you earned honorably and which is well
deserved.

Start being a leader as soon as you put on your civilian clothes. If you see
intolerance and hate, speak out against them. Make your individual voices heard,
not for selfish things, but for honor and decency among men, for the rights of all
people.

Remember, too, that no American can afford to be disinterested in any part
of his government, whether it is county, city, state, or nation.
Choose your leaders wisely -- that is the way to keep ours the country for
which you fought. Make sure that those leaders are determined to maintain peace
throughout the world. You know what war is. You know that we must not have
another. As individuals you can prevent it if you give to the task which lies ahead
the same spirit which you displayed in uniform.

Accept that trust and the challenge which it carries. I know that the people
of America are counting on you. I know that you will not let them down
Good-bye to each and every one of you, and to each and every one of you,
good luck!


Plaque on Memorial, Pictured at End of memoirs

TO HONOR, FOR ETERNITY,

THOSE GALLANT SOLDIERS,

WHO SERVED, FOUGHT, AND

DIED, TO PRESERVE DEMOCRACY

25TH TANK Battalion

LT. COL. ERNEST C. WATSON, CMDG.

VOSGES MTS.-ALSACE (RITTERSHOFFEN)-Bitche

SALIENT-SIEGFREID LINE (STEINFELD)-Bavaria





