I am the 3rd child of Albert William Kratzke, who went by "Bill."
Dad wrote his memoirs about his life between 1941 and 1946, and
put them in a book he called "G.I. Bill."
What follows is my reading of his book.

Dad used many footnotes, which are difficult to read...?.  I have
moved them up in my reading to near where they are referenced and
pointed out each one by declaring "footnote."

Since it was Dad who wrote it, and he wrote it in first person,
from now on, unless otherwise noted, "I" refers to Dad.

Dad introduced his chapters with Bible verses from the
King James Version, and I have retained them in this reading.

This is a reading of just the text.  There are several appendices
and maps that alas, I cannot read to you.


GI Bill:
The Autobiographical Sketch of A Civilian in Uniform During
World War II by Albert William Kratzke

To Ruth
who cajoled and coaxed,
bur also supported and encouraged me.
I could not -- or would not -- have
undertaken rhis projecr wirhour her help,
especially in editing the manuscRipr.
Thank you, my dear!!

FOREWORD
To my children Bill, Mary, Tom, Steve, and Peter,
Your mother has already written a comprehensive history of our
family starting with her nineteenth birthday on August 14, 1945,
the day World War II ended.

Historians deem that war the defining event of the
twentieth century. Our family's story, therefore, would be less
than complete without some accounting of it, so I relate to you
my remembrance of the years between the United States' entry into
the War in 1941 and my return to civilian life in 1946.  I have
interspersed my personal account with the impersonal big picture
of the War in Europe, so you may see how my part as an individual
soldier played itself out against the much larger backdrop of
strategies, battles, and final victory.

I am writing shortly after the fiftieth anniversary of many of the
important and decisive events of the War. The anniversary was duly
noted with many solemn observations at battle sites and with much
attention from the news media.  Your mother and I were among the
many pilgrims who paid homage both in Europe and in the South Pacific .

My childhood and early teens were like those of many other children
of the Twenties and Thirties. I was secure in the bosom of my
parents, my brothers, my extended family, and my church. I felt the
Depression only as a time for careful stewardship of resources and
conservative approach to spending, not a time of want or privation.

I spent two grade-school years, fourth grade and eighth grade,
attending St. Luke's Lutheran School in St. Louis. There I stayed
with my mother's sisters, my Aunts Minnie, Frieda, and
Ella Hoefener. My mother's other living sister and her husband, my
Aunt Emma and Uncle Frank Holbrook, lived nearby.
Uncle Frank had a maiden sister Ada, who rented a house near
Sportsman's Park, home of the American League St. Louis Browns and
the National League St. Louis Cardinals. With all those relatives I
was surely loved and cared for -- and just as surely spoiled!

The events leading up to the War occurred during those formative
years, but I have only dim recollections of the current events
of the time. As a teenager I was less interested in the accounts of
international diplomacy and invasions in Europe than I was in the
daily baseball standing of my favored Cardinals.  I spent one more
academic year living with my aunts -- when I was a freshman at
Washington University in St. Louis in the fall of 1940. By then
I was more aware of world happenings, but even so as a college
freshman I did not spend much time poring over news articles
relating events on other continents.  The citizens of our country
were especially ill-informed about things that happened in Germany.
Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's assurance of Peace in Our Time
had quieted our fears. I did not learn of incidents like the
1938 Kristallnacht, that night when Jewish business establishments
were smashed, until after the War. The existence of concentration
camps was regarded as mere rumor.

Recent historians have written much about the United States'
ignoring what was going on in Germany during the late Thirties.
They are especially critical of
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and of the papacy. However,
other historians such as Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., maintain that
Roosevelt alone among the free world leaders recognized the danger
of Nazism but was powerless to act without the cooperation of
Congress. Roosevelt, in fact, was the first leader to recall his
country's ambassador to Berlin.

One incident worthy of note occurred towards the middle of my first
semester at Washington University. My German teacher was deported,
sent back to Germany.  There was much speculation about his
activities in this country. Was he a spy or perhaps a double agent
being sent to Germany by our government? We never found out, but I
suspect he was just a German citizen who had taken a job in the
United States. His sympathies were surely with Germany, but
I doubt that he was involved in any sinister 'cloak and dagger'
schemes.

My postwar years, of course were different. I had become aware of
events on the world scene. Moreover, I had been in combat, a
sobering experience. It has been said that one does not return from
a war the same person as the one who went into the war. One is
different -- perhaps inexplicably different -- but surely
different. I experienced that change, and you may want to know
something of the times and events that contributed to that change.
I hope that what follows helps you to understand.





Chapter I: PEARL HARBOR AND ME
Shew me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths
Lead me in thy truth, and teach me.  Psalm 25:4-5a, KJV

After my freshman year at Washington University, I matriculated as
a sophomore at the University of Minnesota for the academic year
1941-42.  There I quickly settled into a student's usual routine of
classes, work, and play.  My father continued to serve his parish
in Height of Land, Minnesota, so I was closer to home than when I
went to school in St. Louis. Everything seemed to be going very
well when --
The Japanese Navy bombed Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941.

On that date America's formal involvement in World War II began.
The United States officially declared war on Japan on December 8
and on Japan's Axis partners, Germany and Italy, on December 11.

December 7, 1941, fell on a Sunday. I went to church that morning
at the University of Minnesota Continuation Center. Gamma Delta,
the Lutheranstudent organization, used the chapel in that facility
to hold its services. On the walk back to my room I noticed that
the street was very quiet. When I reached home, Joe Janecky, my
roommate, was uncharacteristically somber.  I then learned why
there was no one on the streets.

The news of the bombing of Pearl Harbor, which happened late
morning central standard time, was on every radio station, and
everybody was at home listening. Joe and I were excited and scared,
and we talked of what the War might mean for each of us.  Joe was
in the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps, so he was certain he
would be called to duty. He hoped he would be able to stay in
school long enough to earn a commission. I had no such commitment,
so I could not even speculate as to what might happen to me.

I was working for my meals as a bus boy and dishwasher in the
University hospital dining room for student nurses and other
employees. It kept strict hours, so I had to hurry off to lunch.
I left Joe and walked the half-mile to the hospital. For the first
time after hearing the grim news I was alone.

I wondered if and when I might be called to serve. I thought about
my parents and how they would react to my being so close to the age
of induction -- and I prayed. I do not remember how I prayed or for
what, but I know I prayed, and I prayed hard.

The next day I attended the all-University convocation. A radio
broadcast of President Roosevelt's Declaration of War speech
("On December 7, a date that will live in infamy ... " ) was part
of the program. I was even more introspective than I had been the
day before, for now I began to appreciate the gravity of our
nation's position and what it might mean to me.

Our country's entry into the War silenced all who had expressed
ambivalent ideas concerning world politics, especially in regard to
Germany. There were many people of German extraction in the society
I knew. The majority of parishioners in the congregations my father
served as well as in the neighboring parishes were descendants of
German immigrants. In fact, the midwest states had a large German
population. Germany of the Thirties had achieved economic and
political stability, so naturally some people openly expressed
sympathy for the German cause and a grudging admiration for
Adolph Hitler. One such person, known affectionately as Papa B, was
a pastor in the same circuit as my home congregation. He was
outspokenly sympathetic towards the new Germany, so much so that
his fellow ministers cautioned him to keep his opinions to himself.
However, I do not think there was ever any doubt about his loyalty
to the United States, were he forced to make a choice.

During Christmas break that first December of the War, everyone was
quite subdued. I went back to the campus a little early to try to
determine what to do. I was a pre-medical student at the time, so
there was some hope that I might be deferred from the draft
(Student deferments usually went to persons in medical,
dental, and divinity schools).  By then, however, I realized I was
not suited for a career in medicine. I went into pre-med for the
usual reasons, to do good and to earn well, and I was also
subjected to some gentle parental pressure. But I soon found that I
had no great aptitude for the natural sciences and that the
physical sciences and mathematics were much more interesting and
certainly easier for me.

Five of my friends and acquaintances of the period are of special
note. One of them was my roommate Joe. Three -- Neil Stacey,
Floyd Myrick, and Joe Vranish -- were fellow employees in the
nurses' dining room, and Tom Olson, the fifth member of the group,
was an orderly at the University hospital. I shall write something
about each of them, for each had different plans and expectations
concerning the War.

Joe Janecky was from Barnesville, Minnesota. His father was a
dentist. Prior to corning to the University of Minnesota, Joe lived
with an uncle in New York.  He was in residence there long enough
to satisfy the requirements for entrance to the City College of
New York (CCNY) (Later, when the college was recognized as a
university, its letters changed to CUNY). The school had (and
has) a no-tuition policy for residents of New York City. While
living in New York, Joe worked as a theater and concert hall usher.
The job required him to own his own tuxedo. Because he already had
a tux when he came to Minnesota, he became an usher for the
Minneapolis Symphony, where ushers also were expected to provide
their own dress clothes. The concerts were held in Northrup
Auditorium on the University campus. If there were a vacant seat in
the back rows, Joe often let me have it shortly after the concert
began. That was a nice arrangement, and I got to hear the orchestra
under several famous conductors. The resident conductor at the time
was Dimitri Mitropoulos.

Neil Stacey was from Red Lodge, Floyd Myrick from Hamilton, and
Joe Vranish from Roundup -- all towns in Montana. They had been
fraternity brothers at Montana State University in Bozeman, and
they all aspired to medical school. Montana had no state medical
school, so they took advantage of the University of Minnesota
medical school's policy of extending resident privileges to the
citizens of Montana. Neil, Floyd, and Joe jointly owned a 1930 Model A Ford
and traveled to Minneapolis in it during the summer of 1941. The
Model A had the nickname Bessie, which on occasion became
BessiFord. I soon bought a share in the old car. Even though I had
only part-ownership, I consider Bessie as my first automobile. I
had never studied auto mechanics, but I soon learned all about a
Model A Ford. I became the one who could keep Bessie going.

Neil was accepted into dental school in Chicago sometime in 1943.
Dental school was a compromise; he really wanted medical school.
Nonetheless, preparing to be a dentist kept him out of the Service.
He married Gwen Sayers, a nurse whom he had met while working at
the University student nurses' dining room. He and Gwen moved to
Missoula, Montana, after the War, and they lived very nicely.
(Footnote 1: Our family was graciously entertained at breakfast in
the Stacey home on our way to Boulder, Colorado, in the summer of
1960. Neil died of a heart attack some time after our visit.
He was only in his forties.)

Floyd, too, went to dental school as a way to avoid the draft.
Because he was in a Navy program and officially in the Navy, he was
required to go into active service after being graduated. Upon
completion of his obligation, he still wanted to become a
physician. He applied to medical school, was accepted, completed
the requirements, and later specialized in orthopedic surgery. He
married Delores McKinney, a nurse from the University of Minnesota.
Floyd's residencies were in Ocean Lake, Oregon, and in Seattle. He
also worked as a Boeing physician for a time. We saw the Myricks
quite a bit during our early days in Seattle.

I even arranged a rental house for them. In 1952, I was working for
T. Wilson, who later became president and chief executive officer
of Boeing. T. was slated to study at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology on a Sloan-Kettering fellowship for a year. That was
exactly the length of time the Myricks needed housing, so I got
the two parties together. After many years of marriage, Floyd
and Dee were divorced, but they still maintain some kind of
relationship.

Joe Vranish went into the Navy and served in the Pacific Theater.
He used his GI Bill benefits for an education in business
administration. He married Rita, a nurse from his home town, and
took a position with a midwestern utility company.
(Footnote 2: We visited the Vranishes in their home in Minot,
North Dakota, in 1964. The nine children, our five and their four,
got up a front yard ballgame. All the offspring slept on the
Vranish rec room floor. We seemed to be a compatible group, and I
have regrets that we did not make more occasions to be together.)

Tom Olson was studying to be an architect while working in the
hospital. I lost all contact with Tom until after the War. One day
early in my employment at Boeing, I ran into him; he was working
for Boeing, too. He married after the War and moved to Moscow,
Idaho, to attend the University of Idaho law school.  From there he
went to work for Boeing, and later still he tried hospital
administration at Swedish Hospital in Seattle. We met with the
Olsons socially several times during their Seattle stay. Tom was
still in hospital administration when he and his family moved to
Lima, Ohio. After their move we lost contact except at
Christmastime. One year our card was returned, and I have been
unable to contact Tom since then.

The events of the War now became very important to us students.
Before the War few young people paid attention to headlines, but
after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, all of us followed the
War news daily.  The first event of great interest was the landing
of American troops in Northern Ireland in January, 1942. That meant
that we had a physical presence in Europe, and surely many more
troops would soon be sent overseas.

In February, the country went on daylight-saving time to conserve
energy. It meant that from April to October we were on double
daylight-saving time: our clocks were set two hours ahead. Before
the War, daylight-saving time was a local option, and no Minnesota
community had ever voted to have it.
(Footnote 3: After the war, DST was still determined by local
option.  In 1948, our first year in Corvallis, the Zion mission
festival had an afternoon speaker from another county. His county
was not on the same time as ours, so he arrived about an hour late
for the service.)

In early April, 1942, Bataan and Corregidor in the Philippines fell
to the Japanese. On orders from President Roosevelt, General
Douglas MacArthur and his family escaped to Australia in a small
boat. Before he left, he made his famous pledge to the Filipino
people, "I shall return!"

After the fall of Corregidor, the Japanese forced the captured
soldiers and civilians to march to a prison camp. General Jonathan
Wainwright was the hero of the hour.  In spite of his rank, the
Japanese forced him to accompany the captured Americans on the
infamous Bataan Death March.
(Footnote 4: The Rev. and Mrs. Carroll Hinderlie were missionaries
in the Philippines on December 7, l941. Consequently they were part
of the Bataan Death March. They spoke of their experience at Holden
Village when we visited there in 1968. It has been reported by
other observers that they were a great source of inspiration and
encouragement in a most trying situation.)

Shortly after the defeat in the Philippines,
General James Doolittle's daring raid on Japan was the big news.
The general's squadron of two-engine B-25 bombers was launched
from the carrier Hornet cruising six hundred miles off the
Japanese coast. After the mission was complete, the bombers went on
and landed in China. It was thought to be almost impossible to
launch an airplane as large as a B-25 from a carrier deck. I saw
newsreels of planes taking off and wonder still how the pilots
managed. After a bomber left the edge of the carrier deck, it would
drop almost to the tops of the waves before beginning its climb.
The raid had no great strategic value and the bombers actually did
little damage, but it was a great morale boost for the homefront.
The raid lifted spirits after the devastating defeat at Bataan in
the Philippines.
(Footnote 5: Television was not yet common, so the public's chance
to see films of current events was limited to newsreels, one of
which was part of every movie program. The big newsreel makers were
Pathe News, Movietone News, and The March of Time.)

In late May, 1942, Reinhard Heydrich, deputy chief of the Nazi
Gestapo and chief German functionary in Czechoslovakia, was
assassinated by Czech partisans. The immediate reprisals were
terrible. Among the atrocities committed were the murder of all the
males in the village of Lidice and the razing of the town. Lidice
was wiped from the face of the earth. Even though my roommate Joe
was a second or third generation American, he had Czechoslovakian
roots. He may have had no relatives in Lidice, but he was extremely
shaken and horrified nonetheless. After nme months of sharing a
room, I had gotten close to Joe, so I, too, experienced a vicarious
horror.
(Footnote 6: In November, 1995, we visited the Holocaust Museum in
Washington, DC There we learned that the atrocity committed at
Lidice was only the beginning of the reprisal for the assassination
of Heydrich. In related incidents a total of 6,000 Jews and Czechs
were killed.)

The most sensational War news late that spring was the report of
the Battle of Midway, by some accounts the turning point of the
naval war in the Pacific.  Once more the country's morale was
boosted. The Battle of Midway was a decisive victory for the
Allies.

In North Africa, General Irwin Rommel -- 'The Desert Fox,'
acknowledged genius in the art of armored warfare, and a German
World War I hero -- was having an easy time with the English in
Egypt.

A little-known general named Dwight David Eisenhower assumed
command of the Allied Forces in Europe. I was to get to know much
more of him later.

At the end of the school year, Joe and I moved across campus to a
spacious rooming house on East River Road. We had a much bigger and
brighter room than previously. At the first rooming house each of
us paid ten dollars a month rent, and at the second house we paid
twelve dollars a month. That's a 20% increase, but we thought the
new room worth the difference. The house was across the street from
a bluff overlooking the Mississippi River. Our room faced the
river, so we had a nice view and felt the river breezes. We could
occupy our room only for the summer, so in September Joe and I
moved into a rooming house across the street, where I stayed until
I went into the Army.

That summer Joe and I both went to work for
E.I. duPont deNemours and Co. at Rosemount, a town south of
St. Paul. duPont was building a gunpowder factory, so the company
needed construction workers. Each of us was hired as a
rodman/chainman, the lowest rung on the ladder of a survey crew.
Joe, however, volunteered when we were asked if there were any
typists among the new hires. Joe could not type, but he thought
office work would be easier than working outdoors. The day that we
hired in was cold and rainy, so the weather probably had something
to do with his choice. He made out fine, typing by the 'hunt and
peck' method. The irony of all this is that I could type, but I did
not volunteer because I thought I probably could not type well
enough.

We rode to work with Al Fischer, a parishioner from St. John's in
Villard.  Work at duPont was interesting and paid well. I
eventually rose above my humble beginnings and was permitted to
operate surveying instruments called transit and level. I felt as
if I were contributing to the war effort.
(Footnote 7: We have other connections with the town of Rosemount.
Carl Friedrich, Ruth's mother's brother, served a parish there.
John Volkert, Ruth's father's father's brother, and his family
established a farming community nearby. When the defense plant was
built, they had to sell their land and move. At a Volkert reunion
in 1989, Ruth and her sisters made renewed
contact with that branch of the Volkert family.)

The Marines landed on Guadalcanal August 7, 1942. Many tales of
heroism came out of the battles waged there.

The Germans advanced east into Russia, and the city of Stalingrad
was in the news a great deal.

War events made good material for films. Just as the movies of the
Thirties offered escape to a country in the depths of the
Depression, the films of the early Forties gave us something to
cheer about. John Wayne played in Flying Tigers, the story of a
squadron of P-40 fighter planes. General Claire Chennault led the
real Flying Tigers in China and was a popular hero.  Humphrey
Bogart played in Sahara, which was about the tanks in North Africa.
Holiday Inn with Bing Crosby was another popular movie. Its remake,
also starring Bing Crosby, was called White Christmas.

The summer ended, and we went back to school. Joe was still in the
NROTC and awaited assignment while taking classes. I was not
subject to the draft until later because I was still under age.

In early October, I traveled to Brainard, Minnesota, to be the best
man in the Warren Maertens-Ruth Hilpert wedding. Ruth had been a
good friend since 1927. Our fathers were ministers in neighboring
parishes, and the Hilperts and the Kratzkes saw each other socially
almost every week. Ruth and I were in the same class and went to
the same high school. Ruth probably would not have asked me to be
best man for Warren (I hardly knew him!) except that his friends
were all some distance from Minneapolis, where he was stationed. I
did not own a conservative suit, so I borrowed one from
Floyd Myrick. I rode the train to Brainard with Marie, Ruth's
sister and maid-of-honor. The wedding was held in early evening
because we had to be out of the church by 7:30 P.M., when members
of the congregation were to have hymn practice with the new, i.e.
1941, hymnal. I stayed with the Hilperts that night and went back
to Minneapolis the next day.
(Footnote 8: Fifty years later, in October, 1992, Ruth and I
attended the Maertens' golden wedding anniversary celebration in
Worthington, Minnesota. Because I had been best man, I was asked to
be the master of ceremonies, and Ruth played the piano for the
assembly of family and friends. In the spring of 1990, we also
attended Ruth Hilpert Maertens' and my fiftieth anniversary of high
school graduation in Frazee, Minnesota. Also,
Edward T. Hilpert, Jr., (called 'Jonesy' for as long as I can
remember) lives in Seattle and has been our attorney since we moved
to the Northwest.)

In October, the St. Louis Cardinals beat the New York Yankees four
games to one in the 1942 World Series. Like my father, who was
graduated from Concordia Seminary in St. Louis, I was a Cardinal
fan. Furthermore, my mother was from St. Louis, and, as mentioned
earlier, I had gone to school there variously myself.
(Footnote 9: Because I was in St. Louis for the eighth grade and
second year of confirmation class, I have the unusual distinction
of having zone through two public confirmation examinations, one at
St. Luke's in St. Louis and later another at St. John's in
Height of Land. St. Luke's confirmed its class on Palm Sunday, and
St. John's confirmed its class in June. After my two examinations,
I was confirmed by my father at St. John's.)

Joe and I went duck hunting that fall. Joe's parents owned a lodge
on a lake near New Prague. My recollection of the lodge is bigger
than life. I remember it as a place not unlike a movie set, either
for a Sonja Henie skating movie or for a
Nelson Eddy/Jeanette MacDonald Canadian Rockies romance. It had a
huge stone fireplace and open-beamed ceilings. Joe's dad joined us
for part of our weekend stay. Joe lent me a 16-gauge double-barrel
shotgun. We settled into our duck blind, set out decoys, and
waited. Joe blatted away on a silly duck call. It must have
attracted the birds, for a large flock came over our heads and
surprised us. Joe shouted, "Shoot where they're the thickest!"
I blasted away with both barrels and got nothing. Neither did Joe.
We did get some ducks later in the day, but we had to leave them
with Joe's dad. We had no way to prepare them at school.
(Footnote 10: By this time Joe's father had moved his dental
practice from Barnesville, Minnesota, where Joe grew up, to
New Prague. New Prague was also the home of Irmgard Meyer, who
married Otto Volkert, Ruth's uncle. Ruth was s flower girl at the
Meyer-Volkert wedding in 1931.)

I had to register with the Selective Service when the draft age was
lowered to eighteen. Villard, the town to which my family moved
from Height of Land, was in Pope County. I had the choice of
registering in Minneapolis, my address while attending the
University, or in Glenwood, county seat of Pope County.  I figured
the draft board from home might be more sympathetic towards a local
boy going to college. I was mistaken: they classified me 1-A. I
thought they might allow me to finish a school term I had already
started if my induction date came during that quarter. Again I
erred: they set my induction date for May with no extension.

So I volunteered!

Gas rationing started in December. Most car owners were issued an A
sticker, which limited the holder to four gallons of gasoline per
week. Automobiles of that vintage seldom ran more than fifteen
miles to the gallon. People in preferred professions, such as
clergymen and physicians, were issued C stickers, which entitled
them to more gasoline. My father had a C sticker.  The ration
sticker also determined the number and quality (recap or new)
of tires the holder could purchase.

In mid-December, after the end of fall quarter, I went to work in
the Minneapolis Post Office for the Christmas rush. I put in long
hours, but I did not mind. The pay, a dollar an hour, was good, and
I made enough money to do my Christmas shopping. I think I went
home on December 23.  That Christmas was the second one of the
War, and the country seemed more optimistic than it had in 1941.
The War was going better for the Allies.

Sometime during the 1942-1943 school year, Joe J started dating
Cleo. After I came back from the War, Cleo was still on the scene.
Joe and Cleo eventually got married.
(Footnote 12: In the fall of 1994, I re-established contact with
Joe. Through an unlikely set of circumstances, I met someone who
knew the Janecky family. I was able to call Joe, and he and I had a
long chat. Ruth and I visited Joe in May, 1996. He was living on a
small goat farm in Texas. Cleo, mother of his two children, had
died, and Joe subsequently remarried. He had led a colorful and
interesting life during the fifty years since I had last seen him!)

Like many other students about to go into the Service, my attention
was easily diverted from school work. Dick Keskey, a GI friend of mine,
told me that he almost flunked out of the University of Michigan
just before he went into the Army.  I made occasional stops at the
game room and the billiard room in the University student union.
The visits were infrequent during my early days on the University
of Minnesota campus, but as the time drew near for my induction, I
seemed to go oftener.

I particularly liked to play three-cushion billiards and bridge.
Harold Hill, the Music Man, would probably consider any skills I
have in either game as evidence of a misspent youth. You got
trouble trouble right here in River City!

In January, 1943, I first heard the name Casablanca.
Franklin Roosevelt, Charles de Gaulle, and Winston Churchill met
there for a conference. Even before the city's namesake movie was
made, the news media endowed Casablanca with an aura of mystery
and intrigue, a kind of sinister glamour.

Early in 1943, rationing of leather shoes, canned foods, sugar,
meats, fats, and cheese began. I ate at the University hospital,
so I did not need any ration stamps. I gave them all to my mother.
I was no longer given stamps after I went into the Army.

Sometime during the winter quarter a call went out for armory
guards. Joe Janecky, Joe Vranish, and I volunteered. We were given
free housing in a barracks-type room in the armory. We stood guard
at night about three times a week, one two-hour shift each time. As
guards we also had to check for security breaches such as unlocked
doors. The guard on duty made one round during his shift, which
took him about twenty minutes. I usually spent the rest of my time
studying or reading. That was my first exposure to military life.

Between winter and spring quarters I took the train to Villard. A
late winter storm stopped all traffic between Little Falls and
Villard. The Northern Pacific Railroad paid for the passengers'
hotel bills and meals. The accommodations and the meals were nice,
but I wanted very much to be at home since I was certain that I
would be leaving soon for the Service.

The War in Europe began on September 1, 1939, when Germany invaded
Poland. England honored her treaty with Poland and was drawn into
the conflict. Because of the War, general world tension, and the
United States' poor state of preparedness, President Roosevelt and
Congress agreed that we needed a draft of civilian personnel for
our standing Army. The draft began in October, 1940. Draftees were
to serve for one year. After the US entry into the War, however,
the time stipulation was changed to the duration of the War
plus six months.

Immediately after the draft was initiated, my father conducted a
lot of weddings.  Married status was a reason for draft exemption,
and getting married became a method for dodging conscription. Many
marriages were only marriages of convenience. Frequently friends of
a couple observed that they did not even know that the young people
were going together. Most of the marriages that I remember seem to
have worked out.

Things changed after Pearl Harbor. A uniform became a badge of
honor. To be sure, part of the urgency to go into Service arose
from the Everybody is doing it syndrome. When one is very young, he
sometimes does a thing more for adventure than for ideals. A
draft-eligible male appearing in civilian clothes frequently drew
speculation from observers as to the reason for his civilian
status.

The homefront also joined in the War fervor. Families were proud to
be associated with servicemen, although I am sure that no mother in
her heart of hearts wanted to send her son into the dangerous
arenas of armed conflict.  Parents of servicemen displayed small
banners with stars in their windows, a blue star for each
serviceman and a gold star for a serviceman who gave his life for
his country.

I, too, wanted to be a part of the great national War effort. On a
Monday in early May, 1943, I went into the Army as a private. I
spent a few days with my family before going in. I could have
reported to the induction center in Glenwood, but my parents and I
wanted as much time together as possible.  I asked for and was
granted permission to report directly to Fort Snelling, near
Minneapolis. Fort Snelling would have been my first stop anyway
had I gone into the Service from Glenwood.

The round trip from Villard to Minneapolis, a distance of about two
hundred forty miles, required fifteen to twenty gallons of precious
gasoline, but Mother and Dad still wanted to take me to
Minneapolis. We left early on a Monday morning. My brothers, Bob
and Paul, were in school. I did not have to go directly to Fort
Snelling. My mother packed a lunch, and we had a picnic at
Minnehaha Falls Park, not far from Fort Snelling. After lunch and a
short stroll, we could see no reason to stay on. Dad parked at the
gate, and he and Mother walked down the post entrance boulevard
with me as far as they were permitted to go.

I walked on alone into a world that both frightened and excited me.





Chapter II: Army Training
Be not far from me, for trouble is near (Psalm 71:3, KJV)

Once inside Fort Snelling, I was anxious, excited, and scared.  I
tried not to look back to the entrance gate where Mother and Dad
were still standing. Finally I did turn around for one last wave.
One does not think of bravery or the British 'stiff upper lip' at
such a time, but I believe that my parents had more of those
qualities than I. Perhaps they were of stronger faith.

Upon arrival, I was sworn into the United States Army. That night
I prayed the prayer of a frightened young man.

When a civilian was inducted into the Army in those days, he was
made to suffer certain indignities. He was kept on edge by means of
fear and intimidation. From the very beginning of his service he
played a 'cat and mouse' game.  'How to beat the system' became an
obsession. I, too, tried some of the tricks. My assignment to
quarters was not yet definite that first afternoon. I was simply
told to find a bunk in any one of a number of wooden floored tents.
I had no sooner done so when a non-commissioned officer poked his
head through the tent opening and announced that everyone in that
tent was on Kitchen Police the next morning and would report to the
kitchen at 4:00 A.M.

Since I had not even unpacked, I picked up my luggage and moved to
another tent. One fellow told me that he had moved four times.
Eventually, of course, the powers that be made definite bunk
assignments, and most of us were made to do some kind of onerous
duty.

My stay at Fort Snelling was one of examinations. My pre-induction
physical in part determined my draft status. Now I was given
another physical, and I was also given the Army General
Classification Test. The results of the AGCT determined one's fate
in the Army. It was like an intelligence test, so usually
a person's AGCT score and his Intelligence Quotient were similar.
Mine were. The importance of this AGCT was impressed upon us, but
some of the fellows seemed not to take the testing seriously. If
only they had known that much of what would happen to them was
determined by that one several-hour test.

For example, my acceptance into the Army Specialized Training
Program was determined by my AGCT score. The ASTP was a college
training program designed to prepare servicemen for certain
specialties.

After about four days at Fort Snelling, I was put into a group
going to Camp Barkley near Abilene, Texas. Camp Barkley was the
basic training center for medics. My 1-A draft classification
carried with it a limited service qualifier because I was
nearsighted. Service in the Medical Corps was regarded as
limited service (Tell that to any front-line stretcher bearer!).
Also I had been in a pre-med curriculum in college, so the Medical
Corps assignment seemed logical. Much of basic training was the
same for all branches of the Service, and I reasoned that I could
work the problem of transfer later. I did not want to be a combat
stretcher-bearer.
(Footnote 1: Is it not ironic than many of the soldiers with the
limited service classification (myself included) eventually found
themselves in some of the worst fighting of the War?!)

We boarded the Rock Island Rocket, a very fast civilian train, in
St. Paul and were assigned to Pullman cars. Two men slept in each
lower berth and one man in each upper. I managed to get an upper.
The Army does not allow for much privacy, so I especially enjoyed
my upper berth. The trip was pleasant and uneventful.  The club car
had a speedometer above the bar. Going through parts of Oklahoma
our speed was over ninety miles per hour. Liquor was sold by local
option in Oklahoma, each county determining by vote whether to be
'wet' or 'dry.' The 'wet' and 'dry' counties must have alternated
because the bartender seemed always to be opening or closing the
bar.

In Dallas our cars were switched to a different rail line, and we
went on to Camp Barkley. At the camp railhead we were met by
commissioned officers and non-commissioned officers, all of them a
part of the permanent staff of the camp.  A sergeant was then put
in charge of each arriving group of recruits. As soon as my group
was assembled, the sergeant marched us off to the our barracks,
our home for the next three months. We were still dressed for a
Minnesota spring, so we found the march in the Texas heat very
uncomfortable.

Basic training began immediately. Many recruits complained
constantly, but things were not all that bad, really. Summer in
central Texas may have been hot, but it was not humid. Unless a
recruit drew KP or other fatigue assignment, his day was routine.
He arose at 6:00 A.M. and 'fell out' for morning roll call and
calisthenics. Before breakfast he policed the area around the
barracks, i.e. he picked up cigarette butts, bits of paper, etc..
One of the drill sergeants used very colorful prose. His favorite
directive was "All I want to see is asses and elbows!"
(Footnote 2: One of the jokes that circulated through the company
concerned a crusty drill sergeant, who divided his people into
groups according to their educational levels. The college men were
assigned the hardest and dirtiest work, the high school group the
next worst, etc. Those with a minimum education were told to stand
and watch the others so as to learn from them.)

The recruit went to breakfast about 7:00 A.M..  Drill or a field
exercise followed at 8:00 A.M. An hour-long lunch break began at
high noon. Afternoons were generally devoted to classes -- a
merciful arrangement because summer afternoons in Texas are very
hot. Retreat formation was held at 5:00 P.M. with a retreat parade
scheduled for every Friday. Dinner was at 6:00 P.M., and after
dinner a soldier's time was his own. Lights out came at 11:00 P.M..

Because there was inspection every Saturday morning, Friday evening
was spent getting haircuts, shining shoes, pressing trousers, etc..
There was only one company barber on the post, so he was very busy
on Friday evenings.  A poor showing at the Saturday inspection
meant extra duty or loss of time off. Such things as Sunday KP,
extra drill or extra calisthenics were common punishments. The
platoon leader, a lieutenant, usually conducted the inspection,
although sometimes the company commander did the job himself.  The
inspecting officer was accompanied by a drill sergeant. The officer
wore white gloves and ran his gloved fingers into out-of-the-way
places in an attempt to find dust. He might also toss a quarter
onto a randomly-chosen bed to see if it would bounce, a sign the
bed was made properly. One time he checked all the beds. (I quickly
learned to make a very tight bed with very taut square corners!).

The inspector paid special attention to personal grooming. Shoes
were to be shined to a high polish. A 'blitz' cloth was used to
polish brass belt buckles. Keeping a cotton uniform looking good in
hot weather was hard. Sometimes our drill sergeant conducted a
pre-inspection inspection. If someone had not shaved to the
sergeant's satisfaction, he was made to take a quick shave with
cold water. Bloody nicks and raw skin didn't help get the poor guy
through inspection either!

Failure at inspection was a minor infraction. For more serious
breaches of the rules such as failure to answer morning or evening
roll call (tantamount to being Absent Without Leave) or
insubordination, the training cadre convened and then meted out
more severe punishment such as standing at attention or parade rest
with full field pack for a long period of time in the Texas heat.
Such a punishment today would be considered cruel and unusual. I
never experienced anything like that.

We had several Gls who seemed to invite negative attention. In
particular there were some professionals from New York --
accountants, attorneys, stock brokers, and such -- who did not take
to training in west central Texas very well.  A walk in Central
Park was their version of 'roughing it.' They had a Regular Army
drill sergeant, a country boy from the South, training them, and
they seemed to incur his ire more than any of the other soldiers.

We spent our evenings at the movies, swimming pool, or post
canteen. The canteen had a soda fountain, a juke box, a dance
floor, a magazine reading room, a game room for ping pong and pool,
and a place with a record player for listening to the records in
the modest library. Sometimes we even had live music. There was
always someone who could play the piano, and many of the players
were very good.  My basic training period lasted through the
summer, so for most of us in that recruit class the swimming pool
was the most popular after-work spot.

The Army barracks scene taught me much about life outside my own
sheltered world. We had no incidents of pilfering, nor were there
any fights.  The main vice was gambling. Every payday there was a
blackjack game and a craps game. Blackjack looked easy and
fascinating, so I tried my hand at it and lost most of my first
month's pay. I seldom lost after that. I watched games, and I
especially studied the players. I learned a lot and fared much
better in later games.
(Footnote 3: On another occasion I met and played poker with a
professional actuary whose civilian job was with the Prudential
Insurance Company.  He approached the game unemotionally and
analytically. He knew all of the probabilities of card
combinations. He never lost, but he never won much either. A
profitable but uninteresting experience for me!)

After a prescribed time of good behavior, we were given weekend
passes.  A pass was good from noon on Saturday or immediately
after Saturday morning inspection until sometime late on Sunday.
The time limit gave the pass-holder too little time to go anywhere
but Abilene, the camp's nearest town.  On my first pass I did not
go into Abilene until Sunday mornmg. I suppose I was unsure about
where I would stay.  Upon arrival I went to church, my first
Lutheran service since arriving in camp (The post Protestant
services were interdenominational).  I then visited Abilene
Christian College. The campus was nice, but those of us who
wandered around there found no social outlet, i.e. girls, so we
went back into town.  Several of us ate dinner in the dining room
of the Grace Hotel, the best eating place in Abilene.  I had filet
mignon. It tasted especially good to me because I was so tired of
the food on the base.

Some of the officers lived with their families in Abilene; thus it
was not uncommon to see an officer and his wife in town shopping.
Enlisted men on pass sometimes strung themselves out in a line so
that an officer coming toward them would be saluted by each of them
in turn. Military courtesy dictated that the officer being saluted
must return the salute. This ploy was especially effective if the
officer were carrying grocery bags in both arms. It would be
better, however, not to do the saluting routine if the officer were
from one's own unit.  He would surely find a way to make each
prankster regret that one salute.

That summer I also learned a little about cock-fighting, an illegal
sport (if you wish to call it a sport) practiced semi-openly in the
back country of central Texas. A member of my platoon was from
Sweetwater, Texas, and he took a few of us to a fighting pit near
his home town. A contest that is just a fight between two birds has
little interest for anyone, not even for the owners, but the
excitement mounts dramatically when there is gambling on the
outcome.  We visitors did not bet but watched bug-eyed as the
action outside the ring was almost as furious as that which went on
inside.
(Footnote 4: In April, 1991, Ruth and I attended a one-week
Elderhostel on Appalachian culture near Abington, Virginia. The
dormitories were all occupied when we arrived, so we stayed at a
motel in town. The road from our motel to the camp passed a tract
of land with many small enclosures. We were told that each of them
housed a cock specially bred for fighting. The fighting itself was
illegal in Virginia, but raising the birds was not.)

Weekly we had a one-, two-, or four-hour hike with full field pack.
One of the hardest parts of the hikes was self-enforced water
discipline. We were allowed only one canteen of water; for each
hike. A canteen holds one quart, and a quart of water was not very
much for a soldier in the hot Texas sun. We got a ten-minute break
every hour, and we tended to gulp water as soon as the break began.
I soon learned to ration mine. The training staff built up our
stamina and hiking abilities carefully so that near the end of
basic training we were ready for an eight-hour hike.

A goldbrick is a malingerer or goof-off. On hike day, the
goldbricks appeared in great numbers as volunteers for supply room
duty, for KP, etc. Sick call always brought out a number of them as
well. Of course the drill sergeants knew what was going on, but
they were powerless to stop the goldbrickers' practices completely.
However, the sergeants were determined that everyone go on the
final eight-hour march.

There was one extremely successful goldbrick, a likable older GI
affectionately called Pop. He seemed always to be able to avoid
difficult or tiring duty. Pop's platoon sergeant was a particularly
loud and obnoxious Regular Army man, and he made it known that he
would see to it that all of his platoon went on the march and that
he would march next to Pop. Early in the march, the sergeant got
blisters on his heels, and he was in real distress. Pop taunted him
continuously: "Carry your pack, Sarge?" "Here, lean on me, Sarge!"
"Hang in there, Sarge. Only twenty miles to go!" The sergeant
finally had to get into the 'meat wagon,' the ambulance that
followed the column of troops. At day's end the sergeant limped
around the compound, and Pop announced that he might go to a dance
that evening. Pop later confided to his barracks-mates that all he
wanted to do was take a shower, go to bed, and sleep for twelve
hours.

We had one four-day field bivouac in early August. The air was so
hot and dusty that I was certain we were training for desert
warfare.  A part of the training routine was learning the proper
use of gas masks. We were made to walk through a room into which
tear gas had been introduced.  Except that a gas mask is
uncomfortable, especially so in hot weather, the drill was easy.  A
soldier tends to get careless: when I was overseas, I rarely knew
for sure where my gas mask was. Non-combatants such as cooks and
truck drivers were even more remiss: they did not always know where
their weapons were.

Another exercise in basic training was running the infiltration
course.  Machine guns at one end of the course fired live
ammunition about eighteen inches off the ground all over the
course. We crawled under the hail of bullets for about a hundred
yards. One had to keep his head down or he would lose it.  No
accident was ever reported from our camp.

The last of the special training exercises was the obstacle course.
We swung across water on ropes Tarzan style, and we came down cargo
nets with full field packs in simulated amphibious landings.  These
are only two of the challenges conjured up by the course designer.

At the end of three months of basic training we were reassigned.
I was offered the opportunity to go back to school in ASTP. I was
also invited to apply for admission to Officer Candidate School.
I probably would have fared better had I chosen OCS instead of
ASTP, but the life expectancy for second lieutenants in front line
units -- whether medics, infantry, or any other branch -- was much
less than that of privates'. For whatever the reason, I chose ASTP
and was sent to Oklahoma A&M (later called Oklahoma State
University) for further testing
and eventual school assignment. The bus trip to Stillwater,
Oklahoma, site of the college, was hot and long, but we passengers
were in good spirits because we were being sent to school.

Isn't it ironic?! When I was at the University of Minnesota and
classified 1-A, I was anxious to end the suspense and go into
Service. Now I was pleased to have the chance to go back to school,
courtesy of Uncle Sam.

My group's quarters at OAM were disappointing. Because we were on a
college campus, I expected to be housed in a dormitory. Instead we
were put into barracks not much different from the ones we had just
left. We were close to the campus and town, however, and even the
Lutheran church was convenient.

The town and the campus were quiet when we arrived because the fall
term had not yet begun. We were encouraged to take advantage of
whatever campus activities there were. I took several classes that
were offered without credit. In one of them, a class in physical
education, I learned a little about fencing.

Again the Yankees and Cardinals played in the World Series. There
was a firehall on the edge of campus, and anytime the firemen were
idle, they had their radio tuned to the game. There were no fire
calls during the Series, so I hung around the firehall and listened
to the games. The Yanks won in five games.

I went to a sorority open house for servicemen. I suppose that we
young men were in great demand, for we were treated very nicely.

One day I was summoned to the orderly room to take a phone call.
My mother was calling from St. Louis. She was at her sisters' home
and hoped I could get away long enough to visit her.  St. Louis is
about five hundred miles from Stillwater, and the most likely means
of getting from one to the other at the time was by bus. The
longest I could be gone was a weekend, and I could not go a
thousand miles by bus in two days. I had to disappoint my mother --
and myself. Had I known some of the things I learned later and had
I been a little more resourceful, I probably could have worked the
problem.

There was a very interesting musician in my hut. He would take a
chair into the shower room and sit and play his clarinet in there
because the floor, ceiling, and walls were hard. He was a very
good player, and the effect was wonderful. Much of what he did
was bluesy, but he also played some Mozart.  Fifty years later our
son Peter makes sounds that remind me of a GI playing in a shower
room -- music haunting and beautiful.

We received our school assignments early enough to begin classes
with the fall quarter or semester. I was sent to Ohio State
University (OSU) in Columbus, Ohio.  Heretofore when I traveled
by rail in the Army, I had always been in a regular railroad car,
either coach or Pullman. This time I was to ride in a troop
railroad car, which was quite different.  Unlike Pullman cars in
which berths ran parallel to the sides of the car, the troop car's
bunks were perpendicular to the sides of the car. Three small bunks
made up each tier with precious little space between tiers. The
only aisle ran along the left wall of the car as one faced the
direction of travel.

Troop cars for all their special appointments were still part of
regularly scheduled passenger trains. The car in front of ours was
a coach crowded with civilians. Wartime travel was always
difficult. Passengers were never guaranteed a seat, and many stood
or sat on the floor.  We opened the door to a civilian car and
talked to some of the people. We were forbidden to enter the
coaches, so we talked from the doorway. I read a lot and played
some cards. Trains were slow during the War, and the trip from
Stillwater to Columbus seemed especially long.  Unlike the Army
barracks in Stillwater which were built to house soldiers, our
quarters at Ohio State were converted from peacetime student
dormitories.  Neal Hall, to which we were assigned, had been a
girls' dorm until it was taken over by the Army for the ASTP
program.

My roommate was married. Married men were given a housing
allowance and were permitted to maintain living quarters
off-campus. I am not sure why my roommate was also given dormitory
space. I practically had a private room.  He was rarely around.

The course work was engineering-oriented.  We took courses in
physics, mathematics, and other subjects. Our only reminder that
we were still in the Army was a series of lectures on mine-laying,
mine-removal, and enemy vehicle and aircraft identification.
(Footnote 6: Technically, we students were in the Corps of
Engineers. I was thus classified for only a short time, but during
that period I had my only formal picture taken. Thus my insignia
on the frontispiece picture is that of the Corps of Engineers.)

Columbus, Ohio, was not a great service town. It had the usual
theaters, night clubs, bars, etc., that any town its size has, but
it had only one United Service Organization. Fort Hayes, a Regular
Army base just outside the city, had several service clubs, so
Columbus was thought to need only one USO. Obviously it was the
favorite hangout for those servicemen not stationed at Fort Hayes.
Local young ladies acted as hostesses and served coffee and
doughnuts. There were ping pong tables, music for dancing, etc.

On December 20, my Grandma Kratzke died. Six days later Grandpa
died. Grandma was eighty-five years old, and Grandpa was
eighty-one. I was informed by telegram. My parents and I agreed
that I would not try to go to Waconia for the funeral because with
the slowness of train or bus travel I probably could not get there
on time anyway.
(Footnote 7: Minnesota was very cold that December. One night
shortly after my Grandma's death, Grandpa was found wandering
around in his garden, ostensibly looking for some non-existent
horses. He contracted pneumonia and died a few days later.)

We were given a few days off over Christmas, and I went to
St. Louis. Had I been able to get a full week I would have gone
home. I traveled by train and thus learned of a local time
convention that was confusing. The city and the railroads observed
different time zones, the former running on central time and the
latter on eastern. Missing a train departure or connection was a
common occurrence.

I met Harvey Sabinson, Tom Bryant, and Don Caldwell at Ohio State.
Harvey had the room next to mine, and I think that Tom was his
roommate. The four of us were to remain friends and stay in
contact with each other for the rest of our Stateside service.
Harvey was the only one I ever saw overseas.
(Footnote 8: Harvey received a battlefield commission at
Hatten-Rittershoffen, a battle to be considered in detail later.
After the War, officers had to stay in the Army longer than
enlisted men, so he and Sarah, married by that time, moved to
Tacoma -- near Fort Lewis where he was stationed.  Their housing
was less than adequate for the climate, so they hated their stay.
After his discharge, Harvey went to work as a New York theater
publicity agent. He has been very successful: he was awarded a
Tony for his efforts on Broadway. He and Sarah have two sons.
We saw the Sabinsons when we lived in Connecticut and several
other times when we were in the New York area. They visited us in
Bellevue on their way to Alaska.)

(Footnote 9: Tom Bryant became an attorney and lived in New York,
Washington, DC, and Denver. One of Tom's sons was asthmatic, and
his physician recommended Tom and his wife move him to a western
climate. Tom's wife did not like the west, and eventually Tom and
she were divorced. He then married Carol and moved to Bend,
Oregon. He related to me how difficult it was to take the Oregon
bar examination in mid-life. He did pass and set up practice in
Bend.  When our son Bill was working for a legal research firm in
Olympia, Tom engaged Bill to do some work for him. After
inquiries, Tom learned that his consultant was our son. He and I
made contact and have kept in touch ever since.)

In February or early March, 1944, the ASTP was closed because
there was need for troops to replace front line casualties.  At
the time we did not know that the invasion of the European
continent would begin on June 6 and that many line divisions were
not fully manned. An untapped source of manpower was the ASTP, so
in the spring of 1944, I found myself on a troop train bound for
Camp Campbell, Kentucky.
(Footnote 10: In November, 1995, Ruth and I visited Fort Campbell.
The barracks are still there. They are now being used as an
academy for non-commissioned officers. The 101st Airborne Division
is also stationed at the Fort, so it is a very active place)

All of the ASTP Gls from Ohio State University were assigned to
the 14th Armored Division stationed there.

An armored division consisted of three tank battalions, three
armored infantry battalions, three field artillery battalions, one
armored engineer battalion, one armored signal battalion, one
armored ordinance battalion, one cavalry reconnaissance battalion,
one armored medical battalion, one armored military police
platoon, and some other headquarters and service organizations.
There was a great deal of difference in the skills required and in
the exposure to danger among the various units of the division.
We were very anxious about our assignments, and because the Army
did little to accommodate the preference of any individual, each
of us was sure that he would wind up as 'cannon fodder' in some
front line organization. For most of us that turned out to be
true.

I was assigned to Headquarters Company of the 25th Tank Battalion.
The only worse assignment would have been the infantry. I think
that Don Caldwell went to the engineers. Both Harvey and Tom were
assigned to the 94th Cavalry. The cavalry was about as bad as the
infantry. Cavalrymen no longer rode horses, but they were still
used as the reconnaissance force, the 'eyes of the Army.' Their
vehicles were fast armored cars and Jeeps, and neither offered
much protection.

Generally, we ASTP soldiers were given a cool reception by the
Army regulars.  We had to prove ourselves to the troops who had
been in the division for a while. There were many references to
those 'smart-ass college kids.' We seemed to get more KP and other
odious chores than the others. Essentially we went through a
hazing period. I remember no unpleasant incidents such as fights,
and eventually most of us were accepted.

Camp Campbell was built on barren Kentucky and Tennessee land.
The place seemed always to be either rainy and muddy or hot and
dusty.  We ASTP soldiers had a lot of catching up to do, so we
spent an inordinate amount of time on the firing range and in the
motor pool. I qualified on all of the required weapons in target
shooting: I was rated expert in the sub-machine gun, sharpshooter
in the carbine, and marksman in the M-1 rifle.  These ratings just
happened to be in the descending order of skills: expert was the
highest that one could attain, sharpshooter the next highest, and
marksman the lowest.  I was never a particularly good shot before
I went into the Service: in fact, I had done very little shooting!

The targets on the firing range were arranged over a long pit.
The pit was below ground level, so there was little danger that
anyone in the pit could be hit.  The target was mounted on a track
so that it could be pulled down for examination after each shot.
A GI in the pit was assigned to each target.  His job was to score
the target shooting and patch the hole in the target after each
firing -- in a way much like a pin-boy's duties in a bowling alley
before there were automatic pin-setters. After each firing, the GI
in the pit would patch the hole, return the target to its
position, and denote the spot the firer had hit by pointing it out
with a colored disc mounted on a long pole. If the firer
completely missed the target, the target tender waved a large
tattered red flag across the target area.  The flag was called
Maggie's drawers, and having Maggie's drawers waved at one was
considered ignominious. I had a few Maggie's drawers waved at me.

In the motor pool we were supposed to become acquainted with
armored vehicles such as tanks, half-tracks, etc.. Learning about
them was dirty work and not much fun.  In addition to our
accelerated training program, we did the usual close-order drill
and other activities carried on by the rest of the company.

I was assigned to the Assault Gun Platoon.  An assault gun is a
105mm howitzer mounted in a Sherman tank.  A tank crew has a tank
commander, a gunner, a loader, a bow gunner, and a driver.  The
commander, the gunner, and the loader rode in the turret, and the
bow gunner and the driver stayed down in the bow of the tank, the
driver on the left and the gunner on the right. I began as a
loader, and I would remain the loader with the same crew until we
suffered casualties. Eventually I would also serve as both gunner
and commander.

The food in our company was very good.  The mess sergeant had
worked for a baking company in Chicago, and the chief cook had
been a chef before being called into Service.  Officers had their
own mess, but many of them ate in the enlisted men's because the
food was so much better than in their own.  On Easter Sunday, the
entire officer contingent ate with the enlisted men.  We had
baked ham and pineapple pie.  I am sure that having the officers
eat with us did not make the sergeant and staff of the officers
mess feel very good, even though they got the day off.
(Footnote 11: The officers mess was an unusual institution.  The
officers paid for their meals and had a private club, so no
enlisted man ever had to do KP in the officers' mess.  However,
if one were called upon for KP there, he was well advised to
cooperate.  Technically one could register a protest, but he would
probably regret doing so.  I personally was never asked to do KP
in the officers mess.)

I spent most of my off-duty time with Harvey, Tom, or Don.  I also
began to have friends within the company.  There were ASTP fellows
from other schools, too, and we had a special bond.  I became
close to the members of my tank crew, especially so with Carl
Phillips, the gunner.

Our leisure time on the post was spent drinking beer at the Post
Exchange, playing games in the company day room, writing letters,
or going to the movies.  Movies were first-run and cheap -- and
therefore very popular. War movies were great favorites.

One war movie that deserves especial mention was Chetnicks.  It
was about the exploits of a guerrilla army who harassed the Germans
in Yugoslavia. The movie was exciting, and (of course) the good
guys, the Chetnicks, outwitted the evil Nazis in the end.  There
must have been some element of truth in the story, but it was
surely exaggerated.  The Chetnick guerrilla band was made up of
Serbian patriots led by Colonel Draja Mikhailovich.  When Marshall
Tito went into the hills in 1941 to organize an underground
resistance to the occupying Germans, he found the Chetnicks
already there.  For a time he cooperated with Col. Mikhailovich.
In 1944, the United States and Great Britain switched their
support to Tito.  In 1946, Tito's men captured Mikhailovich in a
Yugoslav cave.  Tito had Mikhailovich executed for collaborating
with the enemy.  The Chetnicks may not have been so heroic as the
picture portrayed them, but we moviegoers of 1943 were none the
wiser.
(Footnote 12: In March, 1994, Ruth and I attended an
end-of-the-term party for students of a short course about cities
of the Mediterranean.  The host and hostess were Serb-Americans.
They had come to this country in the 1950s.  I observed that as a
young soldier I had been impressed by a movie about Serbian
patriots, who were called Chetnicks. Our host then identified
himself as a former Chetnick.  He showed us a picture of himself
as a Red Cross courier, his 'cover' at the time.)

There were several good ping pong players in our company.  Most of
them were young and lean, but one was an older, somewhat fat
fellow named Louie Brill. He seemed a most unlikely type to excel
at anything athletic. But Louie could beat everyone in the
company. His style was strictly defensive: he stood very close to
the table and was able to return any ball driven at him. It was
maddening for some of the fellows who tried hard to win.  I, too,
lost to Louie.

The arrangement of the buildings at Camp Campbell was such that
several rows of barracks were separated from the next group of
barracks by a large field.  The open area was great for throwing a
baseball or football around.  Sometimes we played pick-up games of
touch football or baseball. The post had only one swimming pool.
It was usually crowded, but I went swimming often during the hot
weather anyway.  Our platoon leader arranged for an outing one
Saturday in early summer.  We went to a park that had a lake, a
few rowboats, a swimming beach, and a diving tower.  No one had a
swimming suit.  I cut off my oldest fatigue pants and used them as
swimtrunks.  We had a nice day, but we missed having girls at the
party. In South Pacific, Luther sings, "What ain't we got? We
ain't got dames!" We knew just how he felt!

In the spring, the battalion baseball team was organized.  I went
out for the team but did not make the starting lineup.  I wanted
to catch, but the platoon sergeant for the mortar platoon already
had the position.  He held it already the previous season.  I did
get to play the infield sometimes.  We won about half of our
games.

It was during our Camp Campbell duty that Harvey approached me
with an offer to invest in a Broadway musical show that his
brother was producing.  Harvey assured me that it was going to be
a big hit.  I asked him about the play and about his brother's
record in show business.  His brother had never produced a
successful play, and the new play was by an unknown composer
and writer.  In spite of Harvey's insistence and enthusiasm, I did
not take him up on his offer.  I could not have invested much
money anyway because I had very little.  The musical was Finian's
Rainbow, and the return to the investors was huge.

Camp Campbell was between Hopkinsville, Kentucky, and Clarksville,
Tennessee.  Shortly after arriving at Camp Campbell, I went to
Hopkinsville (Hoptown to the Gls) on a Sunday pass.  I attended a
Missouri Synod church in the morning, but I remember little else
of the day.
(Footnote 13: The Missouri Synod churches that I attended in
Abilene TX, Stillwater OK, Hopkinsville KY, and Clarksville TN
were all small. I was unprepared for small congregations because
all my life until then I had lived in the Midwest, where
Lutheranism is much stronger than in the South.)

Another time I went to Clarksville and found it no more exciting
than Hopkinsville.  When we (usually Don Caldwell and I) had
enough time, we went into Nashville.  We could get to Clarksville
by bus, and we hitchhiked from there to Nashville, a distance of
about forty miles.  Ride-sharing, even hitchhiking, was encouraged
during the War.  Because travel used fuel, advertising campaigns
showed every empty seat in an automobile occupied by a Japanese
soldier.  Some soldier hitchhikers would shout to any passing car
with empty seats, "You've got four (or however many) Japs riding
with you."  I doubt the drivers heard the taunts, but perhaps the
shouters felt better for having blown off a little steam.

Visits to Nashville were entertaining -- if only because we were
off the post.  We stayed at the Maxwell House the first time we
went there. A popular radio program of the time was the Edgar
Bergen-Charlie McCarthy Show.  It wassponsored by Maxwell House
coffee, a company that advertised that its coffee was served at
the gracious old Maxwell House in Nashville.  A colorful old
ante-bellum hostelry it may have been, but it surely was not
nearly so comfortable as the more modern hotel across the street.
Air conditioning was not common in the Forties, and the Maxwell
House rooms were hot and stuffy.  The furnishings, however, were
genuine antiques, and the place was both picturesque and charming.

In Nashville we ate at fine restaurants.  Unlike the camp movie
houses with wooden benches, the Nashville theaters had seats with
cushions and backs.  The first movie that I saw there was
Two Girls and a Sailor.  Centennial Park has a full-scale replica
of the Parthenon on the Athens Acropolis, the only such
replica in the world.  The city's permanent art collection is
housed there.  The Parthenon also contains an impressive
42-foot-high sculpture of the goddess Athena.  Don and I spent
considerable time in the park because it was so very
interesting and different.

The invasion of the European continent, which began on
June 6, 1944, was of great interest to our camp.  In the days
following the June 6 landings, the talk in camp was about nothing
else. "Would the 14th be going soon?" "Might the War in Europe be
over even before we had a chance to fight?" "Did the invasion mean
that we would be going to the Pacific?" We speculated on the
possibilities.

The Missouri Synod Convention was held in St. Louis that summer,
and my father attended.  Unlike my failed effort to visit my
mother in St. Louis when I was in Oklahoma, I managed to obtain a
three-day pass to go see him.  My Uncle Frank's sister Ada, whom
many of my generation called Aunt Ada even though she was not a
blood relative, lived near the stadium in which the St. Louis
Cardinals and the St. Louis Browns played.  Dad went to a ballgame
with some other ministers, and afterwards he stopped at Aunt Ada's
house.

I met him there.  Our time together was far too short. I wished my
mother could have been with us. I missed her.

Aunt Ada was Catholic, and she gave me a St. Christopher Medal.
She told me that she knew I probably did not believe that it would
offer me any protection -- but she believed it would. She also
said she would consider it a great personal favor to her if I
carried it. I assured her that I would keep it with me. I did not
wear it on a chain around my neck, but I did indeed have it with
me throughout the War.
(Footnote 14: In the Roman Catholic tradition, St. Christopher is
the patron saint of travelers.)

The entire division went on maneuvers in  late summer.  The 2nd
Army Tennessee Maneuvers were the largest war games ever
conducted. We were divided into the Red Army and the Blue Army.
The simulated warfare was preparation for the real thing, of
course, and we all sensed that we would be shipped to some combat
zone soon.  I think that our battalion was in the Red Army, but it
really made little difference.  I never knew or cared who won.  I
suppose the generals cared.  We felt a little foolish doing some
of the things required, not unlike kids playing war and shouting
"Bang! You're dead!"

Mostly we just tried to stay comfortable. Several of us slept in
hammocks. I chose to sleep in a hammock for two reasons: I was
afraid of snakes, and I thought that by being elevated I might
catch some of the evening breezes.  The back country of northern
Tennessee is extremely hot and dusty in August.

Once we managed to find a country store and bought some cold soft
drinks.  Another time we came upon a real hill-billy farm that had
a well with cool water.  The owner's dog was not friendly, and the
owner himself eyed us suspiciously.  I do not know why he was
surly.  Dressed in khaki and arriving in a US Army tank, we could
hardly be mistaken for bandits or revenue agents.  He probably had
a still on the property, and to him we represented government
authority. Anyway we got our water.

After the August maneuvers, we were given concentrated
instructions by means of lectures and training films.  Everyone
was tested to check his being ready to perform duties in
accordance with his assigned Military Occupational Specialty
number.  Still the training went on.  We were given pop quizzes in
things like aircraft and vehicle identification.  The airplanes
and vehicles were shown only in silhouette, just black forms, and
we were to identify them quickly.  In combat we would have little time to decide friend or foe! I did very well in the
identification tests, but I never used any of the information.  We
always knew whose planes were overhead, and it would be pretty
hard to mistake an American tank for a German Panzer!

Every man who had not had a furlough during the previous six
months was given one in late August or early September.  We had to
be back in camp before September 20 because we were to go overseas
shortly thereafter.  I was given a two-week furlough in early
September.  I went directly home without stopping to visit
relatives or friends along the way.  I did not do anything special
while in Minnesota, but even so the time seemed to pass very
quickly.  I had to be back on base only a few days before
September 17, my twenty-first birthday.

Before leaving Camp Campbell, the division was responsible for
repairing the barracks and grounds.  The camp was supposed to be
in A-Number-I shape for the next occupants.  We scrubbed walls,
scoured out grease traps in the kitchen, and painted buildings --
just like spring housecleaning!

Finally the division left Tennessee.  We boarded troop trains on a
railroad siding of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad.
(Footnote 15: I had used the L&N every time I traveled by train. I
would take the L&N north to Evansville, Indiana, and transfer to
the Pennsylvania to go to St. Louis -- or I could take the L&N
through to Chicago if I wanted to go to Minnesota.)

Our destination was Camp Shanks, New York. Upon arrival we were
assigned to barracks that could only be regarded as temporary.  It
was now early October, and the weather was turning cold.  Each
structure had one pot-bellied stove.  My bunk was at one end of
the building, and the stove was at the other.  We were instructed
to discard or send home anything white. We were then issued the
same items in olive drab.
(Footnote 16: When I got married, I still had some GI underwear.
The shorts were secured by two khaki shoestring-like ties drawn
through eyelets on the side of the waist.  In a moment of
frivolity, Ruth replaced the ties with pink satin ribbons.)

We were also encouraged to send home as much of our personal
effects as possible.  Aside from the usual toiletries, I took good
dress uniforms, including low-cut shoes (not boots) and some
books. My Prayer Book and New Testament kit supplied by the
Armed Forces Commission of the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod was
especially important.

After three days in camp, I was given a pass to go into
New York City.  Anyone leaving camp was instructed to remove all
patches and other division markings, and he was to do no talking
about his unit.

Harvey Sabinson invited me to his home in Queens.  He and I went
into New York by commuter train and transferred to the subway in
Grand Central Station.  Riding the subway was a new experience for
me.  Harvey was engaged to Sarah, and she arranged for me to go
out with a friend of hers.  At the end of the evening, Harvey told
me to drive his brother's Willys back from Sarah's house to his
parents' apartment.  I do not remember any details of the evening
or where I was in Queens when I was sent packing, but I do
remember driving to the Sabinsons' in the dark.  I marvel that I
found my way without any great trouble.
(Footnote 17: A "Willys" was a small car of the Thirties. It was
about the size of a Volkswagon 'bug' and a predecessor to the
compacts of today.)

A New York theater company put on Porgy and Bess in the camp
theater.  Attending the production turned out to be a rare
opportunity for us Gls because William Warfield played Porgy.  The
consensus among critics at the time was that his characterization
defined the role.  I did not fully appreciate how good
the presentation was, but I certainly enjoyed seeing the play!
(Footnote 18: Paul Robeson was another great Porgy.)

The 1944 World Series was played during my Port of Embarkation
stay.  We had a radio in the barracks and listened as much as we
could.  All the games were day games, and all were played in
St. Louis.  The lowly St. Louis Browns won in the American League
and the St. Louis Cardinals in the National League.  Neither team
was very good: too many of the players had been drafted into the
Armed Forces.  The Cardinals won in six games.

There was a lot of letter writing going on in the barracks, and I
experienced my first mail censorship. All outgoing mail was read
by an officer, and any hint of where we were or where we might be
going was carefully removed with
a razor blade.  We were not even supposed to indicate that we were
at an East Coast Port Of Embarkation.  I wrote home several times.
I had little to say except that I missed everybody.  I wondered
what my parents suspected.  They surely must have known that I was
going overseas.

The few days in Camp Shanks ended my Stateside service. My next
stop would be someplace in Europe.





Chapter III: Destination: European Theater of Operations
Preserve my life from fear of the enemy.  Psalm 64:1, KJV

We sailed on the USS Santa Rosa.  For the superstitious the
departure seemed ominous: the date was Friday, October 13, 1944.
From Camp Shanks, New York, we went by truck to the ferryboat that
would take us to Staten Island.  At the dock an Army band played
On Wisconsin, On Brave Old Army Team, and The Notre Dame Victory
March.  Red Cross ladies dispensed coffee, candy bars, and
doughnuts.  The Santa Rosa had been a South American cruise ship
before being pressed into service transporting troops.  If anyone
expected her accommodations to be posh, he was in for a
disappointment, for she had been stripped of her fancy
appointments and refitted to accommodate as many men as possible.
Our battalion's quarters were deep in the hold and far up in the
bow of the ship.
(Footnote 1: In civilian parlance that means inside, below deck,
in the forward part of the vessel.)

In rough seas the bow went up like an express elevator and slammed
down just as fast.  Our bunks -- really hammocks -- were in tiers
of four.  I managed to get a bottom bunk.  Usually it was very hot
in the top bunk, and climbing up to it was always difficult.  In
addition to his hammock, each soldier was allotted floor space for
his duffel bag. A packed duffel bag is about three or four feet
long and fifteen to eighteen inches in diameter.  Thus each
bag used a lot of space, and we were very crowded.  We had no
fresh water for personal hygiene: we took saltwater showers and
shaves, and the water was almost always cold.

Sailing day was cool and clear.  After we passed the Statue of
Liberty, the call "All military personnel clear the decks!" came
over the public address system.  I risked being reprimanded by
staying on deck until the ship entered the open sea; I wanted to
see what the ocean was like.  I got seasick, but just this once.
I was glad I had risked being caught topside because those below
got seasick.

The ships in our convoy assembled soon after leaving New York.  A
full armored division requires about thirty-five ships.  The
convoy had a number of destroyers as a protective escort.  The
German U-boat (submarine) threat had been neutralized by 1944, but
we were still glad to have the Navy escort ships with us.  We
could see the constantly-moving destroyers weaving through the
convoy like skiers running a slalom course, and we found them
reassuring.
(Footnote 2: Carl Sealander, a friend of mine at Boeing, served on
a destroyer.  He said that destroyers were fast and maneuverable
and that their motion induced a lot of seasickness for all aboard.
Son Tom, as a civilian scientist, went to sea on a destroyer out
of Hawaii in 1992.  He, too, attested to a destroyer's rough ride.)

Along with the coffee and doughnuts, the Red Cross gave each GI a
kit containing a razor, a toothbrush, a tube of toothpaste, a bar
of toilet soap, a candy bar, and a paperback novel.  My book was
Forever Amber; it told the story of Amber St. Claire, mistress of
England's Charles II.  It was not very steamy by today's
standards; but it was considered racy then.  Other than reading,
the most popular pastime was playing games -- poker, bridge, and
craps.  I won a little money playing poker.  There were a few
harmonica players in our section of the hold.  They usually played
sad and plaintive songs, and sometimes other Gls would sing along.
Movies were shown every night in the mess hall.

The division band was on our ship, so in good weather we had band
concerts on the open deck.  We had a burial at sea.  We never
learned how the young officer died.  We had several boat drills.
My lifeboat assignment happened to be close to our deck assembly
area.

There was a rumor that one of the ships in the convoy carried a
contingent from the Women's Army Corps.  Every pair of field
glasses was put to use, but no one ever saw a girl.  I am almost
certain that no ship in the convoy had any WACs aboard and that
all the ships carried only combat troops.

During daylight hours most Gls spent as much time as possible on
deck. Our convoy sailed a southern route, so the weather was mild.
We did not know where we were, of course, nor did we know where we
were going.  I often stood at the rail at night and watched the
phosphorescence of the waves.  I found the new phenomenon
mesmerizing, quite like a native of equatorial latitudes seeing
the Northern Lights for the first time.

We ate meals standing up at counter-like tables.  The mess hall
had been a balloom when the Santa Rosa was a cruise ship.  A piano
bolted to the floor was a relic of another time.  We ate only two
meals a day, but we did not mind because the food was so terrible.
Breakfast was served for five hours, and the unpleasant smell of
powdered eggs permeated the mess hall, the passageways, and even
some sleeping quarters.  Efficiency foods were not yet
well-developed in 1944.  Even the soluble coffee was pretty bad.
I bought twenty-four bars of candy at the ship's Post Exchange,
and they helped sustain me.
(Footnote 3: Passageway is the nautical term for hall.  A ceiling
aboard ship is referred to as an "overhead," a wall as a
"bulkhead," etc..)
(Footnote 4: Nescafe was the only brand of soluble coffee then.)

Just before our ship entered the Strait of Gibraltar, a pod of
porpoises came along side. They acted as if they were performing
for spectators -- just like the porpoises and whales in the famous
aquaria of Baltimore and Vancouver. Most of the soldiers, myself
included, had never seen a porpoise, so the playful and somewhat
hammy aquatic mammals enjoyed a large and appreciative audience.

Seeing the Rock of Gibraltar for the first time was very exiting.
The African side of the strait was arid and featureless, the city
of Tangier gleaming white.  The rock was more than a tourist
attraction to us, of course: it meant we were going either to
France or to Italy.  The Mediterranean was much rougher than the
Atlantic had been.  Almost all the Gls got seasick.  Fortunately
I managed to weather the storm without that terrible scourge.  The
seas were so rough that when the stern rose out of the water, I
could see the propellers turning.  There was no water to resist
them, so they turned very fast and set up a horrendous vibration.
I felt as if the ship were going to shake apart.

End of Pg 41.
